Title: Optimizing High-Throughput Distributed Data Pipelines for Reproducible Deep Learning at Scale

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.21275v1

Published Time: Fri, 24 Apr 2026 00:29:40 GMT

Number of Pages: 5

Markdown Content:
# Optimizing High-Throughput Distributed Data Pipelines for Reproducible Deep Learning at Scale 

Kashish Mittal, Di Yu, Roozbeh Ketabi, Arushi Arora, Brendon Lapp, and Peng Zhang 

AI Platform & Matching ML Uber Technologies 

San Francisco, CA, USA 

{kashish, yud, roozbeh, arushi.arora, getlapped, pengz }@uber.com 

Abstract —Training massive-scale deep learning models on datasets spanning tens of terabytes presents critical challenges in hardware utilization and training reproducibility. In this paper, we identify and resolve profound data-loading bottlenecks within distributed GPU training pipelines using the Petastorm data loader and Apache Parquet datasets. Through systematic profiling, we demonstrate that network I/O and CPU-bound data transformations (e.g., PyArrow to NumPy) constrain GPU utilization to as low as 10-15%. To address this, we propose an optimized architecture that features push-down worker-level transformations coupled with local-disk caching via Fanout-Cache, minimizing redundant I/O and CPU overhead across training epochs. Furthermore, we eliminate race conditions in multi-worker shared queues by implementing dedicated round-robin ventilator and result queues, alongside modernized RNG handling, achieving strict deterministic data loading. Our opti-mizations yield a 6 × speedup, reducing end-to-end training time from 22 hours to 3 hours, increasing GPU utilization to over 60%, and drastically reducing run-to-run variance, enabling robust, high-throughput, and reproducible large-scale model training. 

Index Terms —Deep Learning, Distributed Training, Data Pipelines, GPU Utilization, Reproducibility 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

The scale of industrial machine learning has grown expo-nentially, heavily relying on the processing of massive tabular datasets spanning tens of terabytes, tens of billions of rows, and hundreds of features. At this scale, infrastructure costs and training times become paramount. However, as GPU compute capabilities rapidly advance, data loading pipelines frequently fail to keep pace. This divergence leads to critical I/O bottlenecks and GPU starvation; in our baseline industrial deep learning pipelines, we observed high-performance GPUs idling at 10–15% utilization while waiting for data batches. Compounding this throughput issue is the challenge of reproducibility. In highly concurrent, multi-worker distributed training setups, identical configurations and fixed seeds fre-quently yield significant run-to-run variance in key evaluation metrics. This stochasticity stems from hidden race conditions in data delivery, making it exceedingly difficult to reliably compare novel model architectures against production base-lines. In this work, we present an optimized architecture for the Petastorm data loader: a library for reading Apache Parquet™ datasets, that resolves both the throughput and determinism bottlenecks. Our primary contributions are:  

> •

Push-down Data Transformations: Offloading CPU-heavy data formatting (e.g., PyArrow-to-NumPy conver-sions) directly to the worker pool to unblock the main training thread.  

> •

Quota-Managed Local Disk Caching: Utilizing 

FanoutCache to eliminate redundant network I/O across training epochs for datasets that exceed local node storage capacities.  

> •

Deterministic Worker Scheduling: Replacing shared queues with dedicated, round-robin ventilator and result queues to eliminate multi-threading race conditions and guarantee strict data reproducibility. Through empirical evaluation on production-scale deep learning models, our proposed optimizations yield a 6 × overall speedup, reducing end-to-end training time from 22 hours to approximately 3 hours. By saturating the training pipeline, GPU utilization is increased to over 60%, slashing compute costs by nearly 80%. Furthermore, our scheduling redesign reduces run-to-run mean average precision (MAP) shift to negligible levels, enabling robust and reproducible model development at scale. II. B ACKGROUND & R ELATED WORK 

A. Distributed Training Infrastructure 

The foundation of our large-scale deep learning stack relies on three primary components: Ray, Horovod, and Petastorm. Training jobs are orchestrated using Ray clusters, which provide flexible and distributed resource management across worker nodes. For multi-GPU synchronization, we utilize Horovod, which leverages ring-allreduce algorithms to per-form efficient distributed gradient descent. Crucially, our datasets are stored as Apache Parquet™ files on the Hadoop Distributed File System (HDFS). Because native deep learning frameworks lack built-in capabilities for efficiently streaming large-scale, distributed Parquet data, we utilize Petastorm, an open-source data access library designed specifically to bridge the gap between HDFS storage and deep learning frameworks (e.g., TensorFlow and PyTorch). Petastorm facilitates the reading of specific row groups, trans-forming columnar data into dense tensors required for neural network ingestion. 

> arXiv:2604.21275v1 [cs.DC] 23 Apr 2026

B. Related Work 

Data loading bottlenecks in deep learning are a widely recognized challenge, and several solutions exist to ad-dress them. Standard framework utilities, such as PyTorch’s 

DataLoader and TensorFlow’s tf.data , offer robust pipeline abstractions. However, when dealing with out-of-core tabular data stored in Parquet format across a network, these native loaders often require custom, unoptimized parsers that fail to scale efficiently. Alternatively, hardware-accelerated pipelines like NVIDIA DALI have become the industry standard for eliminating CPU bottlenecks by offloading data decoding and augmentation directly to the GPU. While highly effective for computer vision tasks (e.g., JPEG decoding and image resizing), DALI is not natively optimized for the massive serialization and deserialization overhead inherent to distributed tabular data parsing, where the CPU must handle complex PyArrow-to-NumPy transformations. Other approaches involve utilizing distributed in-memory file systems (e.g., Alluxio or Redis) to bypass slow network I/O. However, loading tens of terabytes of training data entirely into RAM is cost-prohibitive and practically infeasible for our scale. Consequently, our work focuses on optimizing the existing Parquet-based pipeline to work within the strict memory constraints of local worker node disks. III. C HALLENGE I: A LLEVIATING DATA LOADING 

BOTTLENECKS 

A. Profiling and Bottleneck Analysis 

When initial observations revealed GPU utilization hovering at an unacceptably low 10–15%, we systematically isolated the root causes. First, to rule out inadequate model complexity, we ran synthetic benchmarks with significantly widened and deepened model architectures. Under these conditions, utiliza-tion jumped to ∼80%, confirming the GPUs were effectively starving for data rather than lacking compute-bound work.  

> Fig. 1. Baseline distributed training data flow. The main thread acts as a bottleneck by applying CPU-intensive transformations just-in-time.

Next, we evaluated network latency by forcing a subset of the dataset into an in-memory RAM cache, which spiked utilization to over 60%, identifying HDFS network I/O as a primary bottleneck. However, a subsequent attempt to imple-ment a raw local disk cache failed to improve utilization. This failure revealed a secondary, hidden bottleneck: CPU contention. While the local disk solved the network latency, the training pipeline was still performing synchronous, CPU-intensive data transformations (PyArrow to NumPy) just-in-time within the main thread, blocking batches from reaching the GPU (see Figure 1). 

B. Proposed Architecture 

To dismantle this dual I/O and CPU bottleneck, we archi-tected a solution built on two pillars: push-down worker-level transformations and localized caching. 

1) Push-Down Transformations: In the original architec-ture, the worker pool returned raw Apache Arrow tables. We modified the pipeline to push the transformation logic directly down to the Petastorm worker threads. Now, workers apply the PyArrow-to-NumPy conversion immediately after reading a row group. Consequently, the queue connecting the workers to the GPU is populated with pre-transformed, ready-to-train NumPy arrays. While this trades memory efficiency for throughput, it successfully parallelizes the CPU load and frees the main thread to focus exclusively on batch propagation.   

> Fig. 2. Optimized architecture leveraging push-down transformations to the worker pool and local disk caching via FanoutCache .

2) Quota-Managed Local Disk Caching: Because training occurs over multiple epochs, fetching the same row groups from HDFS repeatedly is highly inefficient. We implemented a local disk cache using the diskcache.FanoutCache 

library. Crucially, because datasets often exceed the storage capacity of a single worker node, standard eviction policies like Least Recently Used (LRU) are counterproductive for sequential epoch training. Instead, we implemented a quota management strategy: row groups are cached until the local disk quota is reached, after which the system falls back to HDFS reads. The algorithmic flow is detailed in Algorithm 1. By caching the pre-transformed data, a cache hit entirely bypasses both network I/O and CPU transformation overhead (Figure 2). Algorithm 1: Optimized Worker Pool Fetching 

Require: Row Group ID R, Local Disk Cache C, HDFS H 

> 1:

if R ∈ C then  

> 2:

Data ← C.read (R) {Fast path: pre-transformed } 

> 3:

else  

> 4:

RawData ← H.read (R) 

> 5:

Data ← TransformToNumPy (RawData ) 

> 6:

if C.size < Quota then  

> 7:

C.write (R, Data ) 

> 8:

end if  

> 9:

end if  

> 10:

return Data 

3) Thread Pool Stability: To further optimize performance, we migrated from a Process Pool to a Thread Pool, elimi-nating the CPU overhead associated with pickling data for inter-process communication. To mitigate the risk of ”zombie threads” hanging on slow I/O calls, we introduced robust sentinel logic in the ventilator to gracefully signal thread termination and tightened HDFS timeout policies. IV. C HALLENGE II: E NSURING REPRODUCIBILITY IN 

DISTRIBUTED CONTEXTS 

A. Sources of Stochasticity 

In large-scale distributed training, guaranteeing determin-istic data loading is essential for reliably evaluating and comparing novel model architectures against production base-lines. While standard Petastorm explicitly controls high-level operations such as deterministic row-group shuffling and data sharding across GPU workers, we observed significant run-to-run variance in offline evaluation metrics despite using fixed seeds. Systematic profiling revealed that this stochasticity did not originate from the shuffling algorithms, but rather from race conditions inherent to the multi-threading architecture. In the baseline system, both the ventilator queue (which distributes row groups to workers) and the result queue (which collects processed batches) were shared across all worker threads. Consequently, the exact order in which data was fetched and batched was dictated by unpredictable variables: OS thread scheduling, network I/O timing, and individual worker execution speeds. Paradoxically, as we scaled the number of workers to improve throughput, these race conditions became increasingly pronounced. Furthermore, we identified subtle inconsistencies arising from the system’s reliance on the legacy 

np.random.RandomState API, which can behave unpredictably when reseeded across distributed computational components. 

B. Deterministic Scheduling Architecture 

To eliminate these sources of randomness without degrading the throughput gains achieved in Section III, we implemented a two-pronged architectural overhaul. 

> Fig. 3. Baseline Petastorm architecture utilizing a shared ventilator and results queue, leading to non-deterministic race conditions based on thread execution speed.

First, we modernized the system’s random number generation by deprecating legacy APIs in favor of 

np.random.default_rng , ensuring uniform and consistent shuffle operations across the distributed cluster under fixed seeds. Second, and most critically, we redesigned the worker scheduling topology. We eliminated the shared queues entirely, instead instantiating dedicated ventilator and result queues for each individual worker thread. Work (row groups) is now assigned using a strict, fixed round-robin strategy. Once pro-cessed, the transformed results are merged back together for GPU ingestion utilizing the exact same deterministic round-robin order.  

> Fig. 4. Optimized architecture featuring dedicated queues and round-robin scheduling, guaranteeing strict data determinism without sacrificing parallel throughput.

By decoupling the final batch order from individual worker execution speeds, this architecture entirely neutralizes race conditions. Data loading is now strictly deterministic, ensuring that multi-worker training jobs with identical configurations will observe the exact same sequence of training data, inde-pendent of hardware or network fluctuations. V. E MPIRICAL EVALUATION 

A. Experimental Setup 

To evaluate the efficacy of our proposed architecture, ex-periments were conducted using large-scale deep learning rec-ommendation models. The training corpus comprised massive tabular datasets stored in HDFS Parquet format, containing tens of billions of rows and hundreds of features, with total sizes spanning tens of terabytes. The infrastructure utilized multi-GPU compute instances orchestrated via a Ray clus-ter, with distributed gradient synchronization managed by Horovod.             

> TABLE I SYSTEM & W ORKLOAD SPECIFICATIONS
> Component Specification
> Dataset Size Tens of Terabytes Dataset Scale Tens of billions of rows, hundreds of features Storage Format Apache Parquet™ on HDFS Compute Hardware Multi-GPU Instances (High-Performance GPUs) Cluster Manager Ray™ Distributed Training Horovod Data Loader Petastorm (Optimized) Baseline Epoch Time ∼22 Hours Optimized Epoch Time ∼3 Hours

B. Throughput and GPU Utilization 

The primary objective of Challenge I was to saturate the compute hardware by alleviating I/O and CPU transformation bottlenecks. Under the baseline architecture, the training pipeline severely throttled compute resources. As shown in Figure 5, GPU utilization hovered at an average of 12%, resulting in an extended end-to-end training time of approximately 22 hours per epoch.  

> Fig. 5. Baseline execution performance. GPU utilization averages 12% over a 22-hour training period due to data pipeline starvation.

Following the implementation of push-down transforma-tions and quota-managed local disk caching, system per-formance improved dramatically. As illustrated in Figure 6, average GPU utilization surged to over 60%, representing a 5× to 6 × increase in hardware efficiency. This improved throughput reduced the end-to-end training time from 22 hours to just 3 hours (an overall 6 × speedup). Beyond significantly accelerating the developer iteration cycle, saturating the GPUs and drastically reducing instance runtimes slashed overall compute costs by nearly 80%.  

> Fig. 6. Optimized execution performance. GPU utilization increases to over 60%, reducing total training time to approximately 3 hours.

C. Reproducibility Analysis 

The primary objective of Challenge II was to guarantee deterministic data loading to enable reliable offline model evaluation. In the baseline state, the race conditions in the shared multi-worker queues caused identical training configurations to process data batches in highly variable sequences. This stochasticity manifested as significant variance in training loss trajectories (Figure 7), leading to a run-to-run mean average precision (MAP) shift of approximately 0.5%. At industrial scales, a 0.5% variance effectively masks the true performance gains of novel architectural changes.  

> Fig. 7. Training loss versus step under the baseline architecture, demonstrating high variance between runs and a MAP shift of ∼0.5%.

By enforcing strict deterministic scheduling via dedicated round-robin worker queues and modernized RNG initializa-tion, we eliminated dataloader-induced randomness. As shown in Figure 8, the training loss curves between independent runs are now highly aligned. Combined with auxiliary training stability techniques, this dataloader determinism successfully reduced the run-to-run MAP shift from ∼0.5% to ∼0.13%, restoring our ability to confidently conduct A/B testing on model architectures. VI. F UTURE WORK 

While the optimizations presented in this paper have sig-nificantly accelerated our internal training pipelines, several avenues for future work remain. Our immediate focus is on ensuring a seamless, platform-wide rollout, establishing this optimized architecture as the default data-loading behavior for all deep learning models across the organization. Fig. 8. Training loss versus step under the optimized deterministic architec-ture, showing highly reproducible runs and a reduced MAP shift of ∼0.13%. 

Furthermore, because Petastorm is an open-source frame-work widely utilized across the industry, we are actively preparing to open-source these architectural improvements. We plan to collaborate with the broader engineering community to integrate these deterministic, high-throughput capabilities into the public Petastorm ecosystem, extending these benefits to external organizations facing similar infrastructure bottlenecks. VII. C ONCLUSION 

At industrial scale, machine learning efficiency requires a holistic understanding of the interactions between hardware compute, distributed software frameworks, and underlying data formats. This work underscores the critical importance of full-stack profiling; we demonstrated that some of the most substantial gains in training throughput stem not from novel model architectures, but from optimizing the data delivery pipelines that feed them. By introducing push-down transformations and quota-managed local caching, we successfully dismantled profound I/O and CPU bottlenecks, achieving a 6 × speedup and a nearly 80% reduction in compute costs. Concurrently, by redesigning the multi-worker scheduling architecture with ded-icated queues and deterministic round-robin assignment, we eliminated hidden concurrency race conditions. This strictly enforced dataloader determinism and restored crucial repro-ducibility for offline model evaluation. ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

The authors would like to thank the Matching ML and Michelangelo leadership teams—specifically Mas-ud Hussain, Dorna Bandari, and Zhitao Li—for their guidance, support, and resource allocation in prioritizing these infrastructure improvements. Their sponsorship was instrumental in transi-tioning a targeted engineering optimization into a generalized, platform-wide enhancement. REFERENCES [1] Uber Technologies, “Petastorm,” GitHub Repository. [Online]. Avail-able: https://github.com/uber/petastorm [2] A. Sergeev and M. Del Balso, “Horovod: fast and easy distributed deep learning in TensorFlow,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.05799 , 2018. [3] P. Moritz et al. , “Ray: A Distributed Framework for Emerging AI Ap-plications,” in 13th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 18) , Carlsbad, CA, 2018, pp. 561–577. [4] K. Shvachko, H. Kuang, S. Radia, and R. Chansler, “The Hadoop Distributed File System,” in 2010 IEEE 26th Symposium on Mass Storage Systems and Technologies (MSST) , Incline Village, NV, 2010, pp. 1–10. [5] Apache Software Foundation, “Apache Parquet,” [Online]. Available: https://parquet.apache.org/ [6] D. G. Murray et al. , “tf.data: A Machine Learning Data Processing Framework,” Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment , vol. 14, no. 12, pp. 2945–2958, 2021. [7] A. Paszke et al. , “PyTorch: An Imperative Style, High-Performance Deep Learning Library,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32 (NeurIPS) , 2019, pp. 8024–8035. [8] NVIDIA Corporation, “NVIDIA DALI: A GPU-accelerated data aug-mentation and image loading library,” GitHub Repository. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/NVIDIA/DALI