Title: Decision-Focused Federated Learning Under Heterogeneous Objectives and Constraints

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20031v1

Published Time: Thu, 23 Apr 2026 00:16:41 GMT

Number of Pages: 36

Markdown Content:
# Decision-Focused Federated Learning Under Heterogeneous Objectives and Constraints 

Konstantinos Ziliaskopoulos 1 and Alexander Vinel 11Auburn University 

{kzz0034, alexander.vinel }@auburn.edu 

April 17, 2026 

Abstract 

We consider what we refer to as Decision-Focused Federated Learning (DFFL) framework, i.e., a predict–then–optimize approach employed by a collection of agents, where each agent’s predictive model is an input to a downstream linear optimization problem, and no direct exchange of raw data is allowed. Importantly, clients can differ both in objective functions and in feasibility constraints. We build on the well-known SPO+ approach and develop heterogeneity bounds for the SPO+ surrogate loss in this case. This is accomplished by employing a support function representation of the feasible region, separating (i) objective shift via norm distances between the cost vectors and (ii) feasible-set shift via shape distances between the constraint sets. In the case of strongly convex feasible regions, sharper bounds are derived due to the optimizer stability. Building on these results, we define a heuristic local-versus-federated excess risk decision rule which, under SPO+ risk, gives a condition for when federation can be expected to improve decision quality: the heterogeneity penalty must be smaller than the statistical advantage of pooling data. We implement a FedAvg-style DFFL set of experiments on both polyhedral and strongly convex problems and show that federation is broadly robust in the strongly convex setting, while performance in the polyhedral setting degrades primarily with constraint heterogeneity, especially for clients with many samples. In other words, especially for the strongly convex case, an approach following a direct implementation of FedAvg and SPO+ can still yield promising performance even when the downstream optimization problems are noticeably different. 

1 Introduction 

Predict–then–optimize is a natural approach often used in modern operations problems: a predictive model maps observable context to parameters of a downstream optimization problem, and an optimization algorithm determines the decision (Mandi et al. 2024). Specifically, given context, i.e., features or covariates, 𝑥 (e.g., customer, market, or system state), a model produces a cost vector ˆ 𝑐 = ˆ𝑐 (𝑥 ) that is then employed in a decision problem of the form min 𝑤 ∈𝑆 𝑐 ⊤𝑤 , where 𝑤 represents the decision (e.g., allocation, schedule, portfolio weights, order quantities) and 𝑆 is the feasible region (Ban and Rudin 2019). In such settings, improving prediction accuracy (say, mean squared error, or MSE) does not necessarily improve the quality of the decision induced by the prediction ˆ 𝑐 , because the optimization layer can amplify or dampen the effect of the error. Decision-focused learning (DFL) addresses this mismatch by training models using loss functions that reflect the downstream decision quality. Smart Predict-then-Optimize (SPO) 

> arXiv:2604.20031v1 [math.OC] 21 Apr 2026 DFFL Under Heterogeneity

framework and its surrogate loss function, SPO+ is the most prominent existing DFL approach (Elmachtoub and Grigas 2022). At the same time, the data needed to learn these predictive models are often distributed across organizations or locations that cannot pool raw observations due to privacy, regulatory, or proprietary constraints. Federated learning (FL) offers a practical mechanism for collaborative training by exchanging model updates rather than data (Kairouz et al. 2021). Data heterogeneity is a well-known challenge in FL. In an operations context, though, FL faces another critical obstacle: 

clients can be heterogeneous not only in their data distributions, but also in their downstream optimization problems . In cross-silo applications, different sites can face distinct objective distributions (e.g., different cost structures or demand profiles) and distinct feasible regions (e.g., local capacity, policy, or regulatory constraints). For example, in healthcare, treatment initiation decision options have been shown to vary across institutions (Ayer et al. 2019). In utilities, energy prices are localized due to marginal pricing and demand (North American Electric Reliability Corporation 2019). In supply chains, many decision-makers are interested in downstream demand and have varying constraints on budget and resource allocation. A single global DFL model therefore trades off two forces: pooling data reduces statistical error, but optimization heterogeneity can induce objective and constraint misalignment, potentially harming decision quality for some/all clients. This paper studies Decision Focused Federated Learning (DFFL) through the lens of SPO+ risk to determine the impact of client heterogeneity on the federated model performance. In particular, we focus on deriving bounds that (i) quantify how decision-focused losses change when the cost vector distribution shifts across clients (objective shift), (ii) quantify how losses change when feasible sets differ (feasible-set shift), and (iii) translate these heterogeneity effects into a comparison between local and federated guarantees. Existing efforts in federated learning predominantly focus on predictive losses and treat heterogeneity as a distribution shift in data only, and generally do not directly capture the additional sensitivity created by an optimization layer, nor do they fully account for heterogeneous feasibility constraints. Conversely, decision-focused learning algorithms are developed for a single decision problem (a single pair of 𝑐, 𝑆 ) and do not directly explain the effects of federating across clients with different downstream problems. We develop heterogeneity bounds for the SPO+ loss by exploiting a support-function representation of the downstream optimization problem. This viewpoint lets us treat objective and feasible-set perturbations in a unified way: objective shifts are represented by the distance between cost vectors, and feasible-set shifts are quantified by the shape distances between feasible regions. We then lift these point-wise heterogeneity bounds to the federated setting by defining a 

client–mixture discrepancy term that measures how far a client’s population risk can deviate from the pooled (mixture) risk. Combining this heterogeneity penalty with standard uniform convergence results yields a simple heuristic federation-gain condition: federation is likely to be helpful for a client when the bound on heterogeneity penalty is smaller than the statistical advantage of training on pooled data. To the best of our knowledge, there is no existing literature on decision-focused federated learning. Therefore, our main goal is to bridge the two fields, introduce the DFFL paradigm, and characterize the main heterogeneity axes that affect it. The main contribution of the paper is as follows. 

• Heterogeneity bounds for SPO+ under objective and feasible-set shift. For the general case, we decompose the point-wise SPO+ loss difference and provide the worst-case bounds on optimization heterogeneity. 

• Sharper bounds under strongly convex feasible sets via optimizer stability. For strongly convex feasible regions, we leverage curvature to control the stability of support points (and hence the optimizer mapping). This yields tighter bounds than is possible for general polyhedral feasible sets. 

• Federation-gain guarantees that isolate a heterogeneity penalty. We introduce a client–mixture discrep-ancy quantity that captures how misaligned a client’s decision-focused risk is with the pooled objective and show how to bound it from above using the proposed heterogeneity bounds. We then derive local-versus-federated excess-risk bounds for empirical risk minimization (ERM) under SPO+. 

• Connections to estimation-based federation gain and to SPO regret. Using Lipschitz properties of SPO+ and known calibration relationships between SPO+ and SPO regret, we connect our federation-gain bounds 

2DFFL Under Heterogeneity 

to classical estimation-gain perspectives and clarify how feasible-set curvature affects the rate at which SPO guarantees inherit SPO+ guarantees. 

• Computational evidence across controlled heterogeneity with synthetic and real data. We implement a FedAvg-style decision-focused training procedure ( FedAvg-DFFL ) and run experiments across two down-stream optimization domains: a fractional knapsack problem (polyhedral case) and an entropy-constrained portfolio problem (strongly convex case). We also apply FedAvg-DFFL to a simplified pricing problem based on PJM Interconnection historical data, and observe that our method results in potential client gains under federation, even with noisy data, low sample sizes, and large heterogeneity across all axes. It is worth noting that the theoretical analysis focuses on linear objective decision problems with compact feasible sets and i.i.d. sampling within each client. The federation-gain results compare local ERM to ERM on the pooled (mixture) objective. In other words, they are intended to characterize the statistical tradeoff between pooling and heterogeneity rather than the convergence dynamics of a particular communication protocol. Our heterogeneity measures are deliberately interpretable: norm distances for the objective shifts and shape distances for the feasible set shifts. However, as with any worst-case guarantee, they may be conservative when the instance structure is favorable. Finally, while our experiments use a FedAvg-style implementation (McMahan et al. 2017), our main theoretical bounds are stated at the level of risks and do not require a specific optimizer beyond producing predictors in the hypothesis class. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the current state of the relevant literature. Section 3 develops sensitivity and heterogeneity bounds for the SPO+ loss under objective and feasible-set perturbations. Section 4 specializes these bounds to strongly convex feasible regions and derives tighter stability-based controls. Section 5 applies the heterogeneity bounds to DFFL, introducing the client–mixture discrepancy and establishing local-versus-federated excess-risk and federation-gain guarantees. Section 6 reports our computational experiments across knapsack and portfolio problems under varied heterogeneity, and additionally contains our PJM case-study. Section 7 concludes with implications and open directions. 

2 Related Work 

In this section, we review the most relevant results on decision-focused learning and federated learning separately. We then briefly outline the identified gap between the two research directions and position the proposed contribution. 

Decision-Focused Learning. DFL (and closely related field of contextual optimization) aims to train predictors that minimize prescriptive rather than predictive error (Sadana et al. 2025, Bertsimas and Kallus 2020). Whereas predict-then-optimize is a longstanding part of data analytics in operations management, integrating the downstream decision model into the predictive model’s training is a fairly recent development in the literature (Miˇ si´ c and Perakis 2020, Kotary et al. 2021, Qi and Shen 2022). Prescriptive analytics, where covariates inform parameters that are learned or optimized through data, is a major topic in OR literature. Examples include the data-driven (contextual) newsvendor with high-dimensional features and finite-sample out-of-sample cost guarantees (Ban and Rudin 2019), reproducing kernel Hilbert space-based data-driven optimization via objective/optimizer prediction with statistical guarantees (Bertsimas and Koduri 2022), and SAA frameworks that integrate residuals to approximate stochastic programs and provide asymptotic optimality and finite-sample guarantees (Kannan et al. 2025). Recent work also uses integrated estimation and optimization to obtain stable decision oracles and generalization bounds (Qi et al. 2025), and robust actionable prescriptive analytics under distributional ambiguity (Chen et al. 2026). DFL is a specific branch of prescriptive analytics (Mandi et al. 2024), and can be categorized roughly into analytical methods (Halkin 1974, Amos and Kolter 2017), perturbation and smoothing-based gradients (Domke 2010, Poganˇ ci´ cet al. 2019), and surrogate loss functions for regret and decision quality (Elmachtoub and Grigas 2022, Tang and Khalil 2024). 

3DFFL Under Heterogeneity 

The use of decision regret, or the optimality gap, as a loss function for training predictive models was proposed and formalized by Elmachtoub and Grigas (2022), who introduced the Smart Predict-then-Optimize framework. There, the authors formalize SPO regret and introduce SPO+ as a tractable surrogate for training. Subsequent work studied generalization, calibration, and empirical performance of SPO+ and related approaches (El Balghiti et al. 2019, Elmachtoub et al. 2020, Jeong et al. 2022). SPO+ is employed as the basis of our proposed DFL approach in the federated setting, since it has a strong theoretical foundation, through Fisher consistency (Ho-Nguyen and Kılınc ¸-Karzan 2022) and calibration (Liu and Grigas 2021), and it is known to perform well empirically (Mandi et al. 2020). However, all existing DFL analyses assume a common downstream optimization problem, which may not be the case in distributed, decentralized, cross-silo operations, where the individual clients may have diverse goals, objectives, and requirements. 

Federated Learning. One important constraint in cross-organizational collaboration is privacy, and it is increasingly studied in the field of operations research (Chen and Chua 2025). FL enables collaborative training without sharing raw data, typically via a model parameter-averaging method performed by a server (Kairouz et al. 2021, Li et al. 2025, McMahan et al. 2017). Federated learning has been shown to achieve near-linear convergence speed-ups, even with multiple local training epochs and few communication rounds (Stich 2019). However, while this addresses privacy concerns, it introduces a new obstacle: mitigating heterogeneity between clients. In federated learning literature, heterogeneity is roughly divided into three categories. (1) Data (statistical) heterogene-ity: The data between clients may be non-i.i.d, or clients may have very different sample sizes; (2) model heterogeneity: 

clients may have different features, modalities, or pre-trained model architectures that need to somehow be aggregated; (3) system (device) heterogeneity: (Gao et al. 2022, Ye et al. 2023, Su et al. 2023). Note, though, that in the contextual optimization setting, further heterogeneity can be important, as the decision problem itself, i.e., the objectives and constraints, can vary between different clients. While federated learning can still converge under moderate data heterogeneity, non-i.i.d clients significantly degrade training speed and model performance (Li et al. 2020b, Khaled et al. 2020). To combat this, there have been many algorithmic advances that build on the seminal FedAvg algorithm of (McMahan et al. 2017) to penalize weight drift (Li et al. 2020a), control gradient drift (Karimireddy et al. 2020), or correct for data imbalance (Wang et al. 2020). Another approach is personalization . Here studies train a global model through federated learning then adapt it to a specific client’s domain through meta-learning approaches (Fallah et al. 2020), local personalization (Li et al. 2021), or multitask learning (Sattler et al. 2020). These approaches adapt predictive models but do not incorporate downstream optimization layers, and therefore do not incorporate decision risk. 

Positioning of our work. Heterogeneity in FL research is typically defined as a distribution shift in a supervised prediction task. However, there has been an effort to expand FL to other domains or tasks (Smith et al. 2017). FL has been used for generative modeling (Augenstein et al. 2020), recommendation systems (Flanagan et al. 2020), and domain adaptation (Zhang et al. 2021). In the scope of contextual optimization, FL has been extended to policy gradient methods (Khodadadian et al. 2022) and actor-critic methods (Zhuo et al. 2019). Conceptually, our work lies at the intersection of decision-focused learning and federated learning. Whereas DFL studies how prediction errors propagate to a downstream optimization layer, and FL studies how distributed prediction models can be trained under data heterogeneity, we study how heterogeneity in the optimization layer itself affects the statistical tradeoff between local and federated training, and how that impacts the model’s performance. 

3 Optimization heterogeneity between clients 

Notation and background. An overview of notation used throughout this paper is given in Table 1. We begin with preliminary definitions and assumptions that we will use throughout the paper. Let 𝑑 ∈ N. For any nonempty set 

4DFFL Under Heterogeneity 

Table 1: Notation used throughout the paper. 

Symbol Meaning 

𝑆 𝑗 Feasible set for client 𝑗 .

ℓ𝑆  

> SPO +

( ˆ𝑐, 𝑐 ) SPO+ surrogate loss for feasible set 𝑆 .

𝜉 𝑆 (𝑢 ) Support function of 𝑆 : 𝜉 𝑆 (𝑢 ) = max 𝑤 ∈𝑆 𝑢 ⊤𝑤 .

𝑑 𝐻 (𝑆 𝑖 , 𝑆 𝑗 ) Hausdorff distance between feasible sets 𝑆 𝑖 and 𝑆 𝑗 .

𝛿 𝑁 Translation-invariant shape distance between feasible sets (see Lemma 3). 

𝑐 𝑑 Objective heterogeneity magnitude (difference between client/reference cost vectors, e.g., ∥𝑐 𝑖 −

𝑐 𝑗 ∥). 

𝐻 ( ˆ𝑐 ) General heterogeneity upper bound on client SPO+ loss gap (see Theorem 1). 

𝜌 Strong-convexity radius of a feasible set (used in the strongly convex refinement). 

Δ 𝑗 Client–mixture discrepancy: sup 𝑔 ∈ H |𝑅 𝑗 (𝑔 ) − 𝑅 mix (𝑔 )| .

𝑅 𝑗 (𝑔 ), 𝑅 mix (𝑔 ) Population SPO+ risk for client 𝑗 and the federated mixture risk, respectively. 

𝜀 𝑗 , 𝜀 mix Statistical complexity / estimation terms for local and federated learning (Section 5). 

𝑆 ⊂ R𝑑 define its support function 

𝜉 𝑆 (𝑢 ) := max   

> 𝑤 ∈𝑆

𝑢 ⊤𝑤 ∈ R ∪ {+∞} .

Given a cost vector 𝑐 ∈ R𝑑 and feasible set 𝑆 , consider the linear program 

𝑧 ★𝑆 (𝑐 ) := min   

> 𝑤 ∈𝑆

𝑐 ⊤𝑤, 𝑊 ★𝑆 (𝑐 ) := arg min   

> 𝑤 ∈𝑆

𝑐 ⊤𝑤. (1) Fix an oracle 𝑤 ★𝑆 (·) selecting a point 𝑤 ★𝑆 (𝑐 ) ∈ 𝑊 ★𝑆 (𝑐 ) for every 𝑐 (whenever the set is nonempty). The SPO loss function ℓSPO (𝑐, ˆ𝑐 ) is defined as, 

ℓSPO (𝑐, ˆ𝑐 ) := 𝑐 𝑇 𝑤 ★( ˆ𝑐 ) − 𝑧 ★(𝑐 ).

Following (Elmachtoub and Grigas 2022), the surrogate SPO+ loss is 

ℓ𝑆  

> SPO +

( ˆ𝑐, 𝑐 ) := max   

> 𝑤 ∈𝑆

{𝑐 ⊤𝑤 − 2 ˆ 𝑐 ⊤𝑤 } + 2 ˆ 𝑐 ⊤𝑤 ★𝑆 − 𝑧 ★𝑆 , (2) where the max term corresponds to the support function 𝜉 𝑆 , meaning the SPO+ loss can be rewritten as ℓ𝑆  

> SPO +

( ˆ𝑐, 𝑐 ) =

𝜉 𝑆 (𝑐 − 2 ˆ 𝑐 ) + 2 ˆ 𝑐 ⊤𝑤 ★𝑆 (𝑐 ) − 𝑧 ★𝑆 (𝑐 ). The SPO+ loss is comprised of three parts: the maximum (or support function) term, the decision term, and the objective value term. Note that the objective value term itself can be expressed as a support function, i.e., −𝜉 𝑆 (− 𝑐 ).Let ∥ · ∥ denote the 𝐿 2 norm on R𝑑 . While all of our results in Section 3 and some in Section 4 apply to all norms, for simplicity’s sake (and to align with our experimentation) we use the ∥ · ∥ = ∥ · ∥ 2 throughout this paper. For any nonempty compact sets 𝑆 1, 𝑆 2 ⊂ R𝑑 , we define the Hausdorff distance 

𝑑 𝐻 (𝑆 1, 𝑆 2) := max 

n

sup  

> 𝑥 ∈𝑆 1

inf  

> 𝑦 ∈𝑆 2

∥𝑥 − 𝑦 ∥, sup  

> 𝑦 ∈𝑆 2

inf  

> 𝑥 ∈𝑆 1

∥𝑥 − 𝑦 ∥

o

,

and the diameter 𝐷 (𝑆 ) := sup 𝑢,𝑣 ∈𝑆 ∥𝑢 − 𝑣 ∥. Here 𝐷 (𝑆 ) = 𝐷 𝑆 is also the Euclidean diameter of the feasible set, which matches the notation used by (Liu and Grigas 2021). Throughout the rest of the paper, we will maintain the following assumptions. 

Assumption 1 (Compactness) . The feasible sets of interest are nonempty and compact, so 𝜉 𝑆 (·) is finite and max-ima/minima in (1) –(2) are attained. 

Assumption 2 (Convexity) . For each instance, the feasible sets of interest 𝑆 ⊆ R𝑑 are convex. 

Assumption 3 (Boundedness of vectors) . The objective function vector’s norm 0 < 𝐶 min ≤ ∥ 𝑐 ∥ ≤ 𝐶 max is bounded above and strictly bounded away from zero, while the prediction vector’s norm ∥ ˆ𝑐 ∥ ≤ 𝜏 is bounded from above. 

We first demonstrate why the bound in the general case has to be fairly loose, and under what assumptions we can expect a better behaved mixture model with a simplified example. 

5DFFL Under Heterogeneity x1

x2

S  

> x1 +x2 = 1
> v3
> v1
> w⋆S(c(1) )
> v2
> w⋆S(c(2) )
> √2 =  DS
> c(1)
> c(2)
> (a) Polyhedral case S
> ∥x∥ ≤ 1
> c(1)
> c(2)
> w⋆S(c(1) )
> w⋆S(c(2) )
> O(ε)
> x1
> x2(b) Strongly convex case

Figure 1: Example configurations of two clients with slightly different objective vectors and the impact on the downstream decision vectors. 

3.1 A toy example The polyhedral case. Suppose that we have two clients with coefficient vectors 𝑐 1 and 𝑐 2, with a common feasible set 𝑆 defined as: 𝑆 ={𝑤 ∈ R2 : 0 ≤ 𝑤 1 ≤ 1, 0 ≤ 𝑤 2 ≤ 1, 𝑤 1 + 𝑤 2 ≥ 1}, shown in Figure 1a, with vertices 

𝑣 1 = (1, 0), 𝑣 2 = (0, 1), and 𝑣 3 = (1, 1). For a specific (𝑥, 𝑐 ) pair, the clients’ coefficient vectors are defined as: 

𝑐 (1) = 𝑐 1 + 𝑐 = [1, 1 + 𝜖 ]𝑇 , 𝑐 (2) = 𝑐 2 + 𝑐 = [1 + 𝜖, 1]𝑇 ,

for 𝜖 > 0, where 𝑐 is the common ground-truth vector the model is trying to approximate, and 𝑐 𝑖 the heterogeneity term. They each optimize min 𝑤 𝑐 (1)𝑇 𝑤, min 𝑤 𝑐 (2)𝑇 𝑤 with the corresponding optimizers 𝑤 ★𝑆 (𝑐 (1) ), 𝑤 ★𝑆 (𝑐 (2) ) at extreme points 𝑣 1 = (1, 0) with 𝑐 (1)𝑇 𝑣 1 = 1, and 𝑣 2 = (0, 1) with 𝑐 (2)𝑇 𝑣 2 = 1. Note that the change in the resulting optimal solution is, 

∥𝑤 ★𝑆 (𝑐 (1) ) − 𝑤 ★𝑆 (𝑐 (2) )∥ = ∥𝑣 1 − 𝑣 2 ∥ = √2 = 𝐷 𝑆 ,

even as ∥𝑐 1 − 𝑐 2 ∥ = √2𝜖 → 0, 𝜖 → 0. We can now calculate their corresponding worst-case SPO+ losses as max ˆ𝑐 |ℓ1SPO + − ℓ2SPO + |. Let ˆ 𝑐 = [ ˆ𝑐 1, ˆ𝑐 2]𝑇 , with 

∥ ˆ𝑐 ∥ ≤ 𝐵 , using vertex enumeration for 𝑆 ,max     

> ∥ˆ𝑐 ∥ ≤ 𝐵

|ℓ1SPO + ( ˆ𝑐 ) − ℓ2SPO + ( ˆ𝑐 )| ≤ 𝜖 + 2√2𝐵 

In other words, an arbitrarily small difference in objective function vectors between clients can cause a large difference in pointwise SPO+ losses, a direct consequence of the fact that linear program solutions are in the extreme points. This then implies that any possible bound that we can establish on the SPO+ loss with respect to the client objective heterogeneity in a general case necessarily has to be relatively loose to account for this. A tighter bound may be possible if additional assumptions are made, though. 

The strongly convex case. Now consider the same two clients, but a unit-ball feasible set, i.e., 𝑆 = {𝑤 ∈ R2 : ∥𝑤 ∥ ≤ 

1}. We can observe that the optimal solution vector is less sensitive to objective shifts, and therefore so is the difference 

6DFFL Under Heterogeneity 

in SPO+ loss, as shown in Figure 1b. Specifically, the components of the loss for 𝑆 are equal to: 

𝑤 ★𝑆 (𝑐 ) = − 𝑐 

∥𝑐 ∥ , 𝜉 𝑆 (𝑢 ) = ∥𝑢 ∥, 𝑧 ★𝑆 (𝑐 ) = −∥ 𝑐 ∥.

Consequently, 

∥𝑤 ★𝑆 (𝑐 (1) ) − 𝑤 ★𝑆 (𝑐 (2) )∥ =

√2𝜖 

√2 + 𝜖 2 + 2𝜖 = 𝑂 (𝜖 ).

max     

> ∥ˆ𝑐 ∥ ≤ 𝐵

|ℓ1SPO + ( ˆ𝑐 ) − ℓ2SPO + ( ˆ𝑐 )| ≤ √2𝜖 



1 + 2𝐵 

√2 + 2𝜖 + 𝜖 2



= 𝑂 (𝜖 (1 + 𝐵 )) , (3) which vanishes as 𝜖 → 0, unlike the polyhedral bound 𝜖 + 2√2𝐵 . The key observation here is that curvature replaces diameter in the decision term, and therefore the loss scales with cost heterogeneity, which is what we formalize in Corollary 1 below. Polyhedral sets, on the other hand, force a looser bound to account for potential discontinuity in the decision vector. 

3.2 Bounding point-wise losses in the general case 

First, we establish the sensitivity of expression (2) to perturbations in the feasible set, as measured by the Hausdorff distance between the sets. More detailed account of the properties of the support functions can be found in Schneider (2013). While relatively straightforward, proofs for Lemmas 1 to 5 are given in the Appendix for the sake of completeness. 

Lemma 1 (Sensitivity to set perturbations) . Let 𝑆 1, 𝑆 2 be nonempty compact sets and 𝛿 = 𝑑 𝐻 (𝑆 1, 𝑆 2). Then for any 

𝑢 ∈ R𝑑 ,

|𝜉 𝑆 1 (𝑢 ) − 𝜉 𝑆 2 (𝑢 )| ≤ ∥ 𝑢 ∥ 𝛿. 

Lemma 2 (Set sensitivity of 𝑧 ★𝑆 ). Let 𝑆 1, 𝑆 2 be nonempty compact sets and 𝛿 = 𝑑 𝐻 (𝑆 1, 𝑆 2). Then for any 𝑐 ∈ R𝑑 ,

|𝑧 ★𝑆 1 (𝑐 ) − 𝑧 ★𝑆 2 (𝑐 )| ≤ ∥ 𝑐 ∥ 𝛿. 

Lemma 3 (Translation-invariance of the SPO+ loss function) . For ℓ𝑆 ( ˆ𝑐, 𝑐 ) defined as in Equation 2 and 𝑣, 𝑐, ˆ𝑐 ∈ R𝑑 ,

ℓ𝑆 +𝑣 ( ˆ𝑐, 𝑐 ) = ℓ𝑆 ( ˆ𝑐, 𝑐 ).

The first two results are known support function properties. Intuitively, they mean that the difference in loss between two clients with different feasible sets is bounded by the distance between them, scaled by the magnitude of their objective function coefficients. This result can be further strengthened based on Lemma 3, which establishes set-translation invariance of SPO+. We can then consider a new distance metric, which we refer to as shape distance ,

𝛿 𝑁 := inf 𝑣 𝑑 𝐻 (𝑆 ref , 𝑆 cl + 𝑣 ). We can “shift” one client’s feasible set in order to minimize the heterogeneity, or, in other words, the only important difference between the clients is in the shape of their feasible sets, not their distance to the origin. Two sets may have identical constraints up to a shift in coordinates, and SPO+ loss does not distinguish between them. For the case of objective heterogeneity, we employ both the support function and objective value terms together in Lemma 4, and we can obtain an intuitive result: the terms are bounded above by the distance between objective vectors, scaled by the feasible set geometry. 

Lemma 4 (Diameter-Lipschitzness of 𝜉 𝑆 (𝑐 − 2 ˆ 𝑐 ) − 𝑧 ★𝑆 (𝑐 )). Under assumptions, for any 𝑐 1, 𝑐 2, ˆ𝑐 ∈ R𝑑 ,

 𝜉 𝑆 (𝑐 1 − 2 ˆ 𝑐 ) − 𝑧 ★𝑆 (𝑐 1) −  𝜉 𝑆 (𝑐 2 − 2 ˆ 𝑐 ) − 𝑧 ★𝑆 (𝑐 2) ≤ 𝐷 (𝑆 ) ∥ 𝑐 1 − 𝑐 2 ∥.

7DFFL Under Heterogeneity 

Lemma 5 (Bounding linear functionals across two sets) . Let 𝑆 1, 𝑆 2 be compact and 𝛿 = 𝑑 𝐻 (𝑆 1, 𝑆 2). For any ˆ𝑐 ∈ R𝑑 

and any 𝑤 1 ∈ 𝑆 1, 𝑤 2 ∈ 𝑆 2,

| ˆ𝑐 ⊤𝑤 1 − ˆ𝑐 ⊤𝑤 2 | ≤ ∥ ˆ𝑐 ∥  𝛿 + min {𝐷 (𝑆 1), 𝐷 (𝑆 2)} .

As we saw in Section 3.1, in the general case the decision vector can jump up to the diameter of the feasible set even under slight heterogeneity, i.e., even when 𝑆 1 → 𝑆 2, the term 𝐷 (𝑆 ) cannot be excluded from the bound. We now present the main result of Section 3 in Theorem 1: The difference between the point-wise SPO+ losses 

ℓ𝑖 

> SPO +

, ℓ 𝑗  

> SPO +

of two heterogeneous clients 𝑖, 𝑗 in set and objective is bounded above by two terms: the decision vector shift, and the support/objective mismatch. The proof is given in Appendix B. 

Theorem 1 (SPO+ loss discrepancy under objective and feasible-set shift) . Define 𝑐 𝑑 := ∥𝑐 ref − 𝑐 cl ∥, 𝛿 𝑁 :=

inf 𝑣 𝑑 𝐻 (𝑆 ref , 𝑆 cl + 𝑣 ), 𝐷 ref := 𝐷 (𝑆 ref ), 𝐷 cl := 𝐷 (𝑆 cl ), 𝐷 min := min {𝐷 ref , 𝐷 cl }.

For any ˆ𝑐 ∈ R𝑑 , define 

H ( ˆ𝑐 ) := 2∥ ˆ𝑐 ∥( 𝛿 𝑁 + 𝐷 min ) + min {𝐷 ref 𝑐 𝑑 + 𝛿 𝑁 (∥ 𝑐 cl − 2 ˆ 𝑐 ∥ + ∥ 𝑐 cl ∥) , 𝐷 cl 𝑐 𝑑 + 𝛿 𝑁 (∥ 𝑐 ref − 2 ˆ 𝑐 ∥ + ∥ 𝑐 ref ∥)} . (4) 

Then 

ℓ𝑆 ref ( ˆ𝑐, 𝑐 ref ) − ℓ𝑆 cl ( ˆ𝑐, 𝑐 cl ) ≤ H ( ˆ𝑐 ).

Theorem 1 bounds the point-wise loss discrepancy by the term H ( ˆ𝑐 ), which consists of two components. The first term comes from the decision vector shift and Lemma 5, and depends on (i) the difference in set shapes and (ii) the size of the smallest set. It is then scaled by the magnitude of the predictive model. The second term stems from the support function and the objective value terms, and it characterizes the objective heterogeneity, the feasible sets’ shape distance, scaled largely by the magnitude of the objective functions and model outputs, as well as the client geometry. We note that the SPO+ loss is not scale invariant . In practice, model outputs can grow arbitrarily large while gradients vanish, which would significantly weaken the bound in Theorem 1. For the analysis, Assumption 3 prevents this scenario, and we enforce it for the experiments conducted in Assumption 3 Section 6. This means that we can essentially control the terms ∥ ˆ𝑐 ∥ and ∥𝑐 − 2 ˆ 𝑐 ∥ in the bound through our model design, while the other terms depend on the parameters of the clients’ downstream optimization problems. 

4 Strongly Convex Feasible Sets 

Definition 1 (Strongly convex set) . A set 𝑆 ⊆ R𝑛 is called strongly convex with radius 𝜌 > 0 if it can be expressed as an intersection of closed balls of radius 𝜌 . That is, 𝑆 = Ñ𝑥 ∈𝑋 𝐵 𝜌 (𝑥 ), where 𝑋 ⊆ R𝑛 is a set of centers and 𝐵 𝜌 (𝑥 ) is a closed ball of radius 𝜌 centered at 𝑥 (Polovinkin 1996). 

Assumption 4 (Strong convexity of the feasible set) . In addition to previous assumptions, the feasible sets of interest are strongly convex of radius 𝜌 under Definition 1. 

In Section 3, the decision term was controlled by the diameter of the set 𝑆 , which was part of the upper bound regardless of the size of the objective perturbation. As we saw in Section 3.1, strong convexity in the feasible set can make the decision term change continuously with perturbations. In this section, we formalize this in an upper bound for the strongly convex case that is tighter than the general bound of Theorem 1. Proofs for Lemmas 6 to 8 can be found in the Appendix, Section B. We also introduce the following notation to simplify the presentation. For a nonempty compact set 𝑆 ⊂ R𝑑 and a direction 𝑝 ∈ R𝑑 , let 𝑥 𝑆 ( 𝑝 ) ∈ arg max 𝑥 ∈𝑆 𝑝 𝑇 𝑥 denote the maximizer of 𝑆 in direction 𝑝 ,and 𝑤 ★𝑆 ( 𝑝 ) ∈ arg min 𝑥 ∈𝑆 𝑝 𝑇 𝑥 denote the minimizer in direction 𝑝 .

Lemma 6 (Directional stability of support points) . Let 𝑆 ⊂ R𝑑 be nonempty, compact, and 𝜌 -strongly convex. Then for every 𝑝, 𝑞 ∈ R𝑑 , ∥ 𝑝 ∥ = ∥𝑞 ∥ = 1, the support point is unique and the map 𝑝 ↦ → 𝑥 𝑆 ( 𝑝 ) is 𝜌 -Lipschitz: 

8DFFL Under Heterogeneity 

∥𝑥 𝑆 ( 𝑝 ) − 𝑥 𝑆 (𝑞 )∥ ≤ 𝜌 ∥ 𝑝 − 𝑞 ∥. Consequently, for any 𝑐 1, 𝑐 2 ≠ 0,

∥𝑤 ★𝑆 (𝑐 1) − 𝑤 ★𝑆 (𝑐 2)∥ ≤ 𝜌 𝑐 1

∥𝑐 1 ∥ − 𝑐 2

∥𝑐 2 ∥ .

For the same feasible set 𝑆 , Lemma 6 shows that the optimal decisions for different clients can only differ up to the difference in directions, scaled by the curvature. This is also intuitive through a geometric perspective: in the strongly convex case, the optimal point in a minimization problem is the projection of the objective vector −𝑐 𝑖 onto the feasible set 𝑆 . Since optimal points cannot be found in the interior of the set, this distance cannot grow arbitrarily as in the general case. This is also why the normalization by the norm appears here: since the optimal point is projected back to the feasible set from the objective vector, its magnitude is irrelevant; only its direction affects the decision. Furthermore, due to Assumption 3 ∥𝑐 ∥ ≠ 0. 

Lemma 7 (Quadratic growth from curvature) . Let 𝑆 ⊂ R𝑑 be nonempty, compact, and 𝜌 -strongly convex. Fix 

𝑝 ∈ R𝑑 , ∥ 𝑝 ∥ = 1, and let 𝑥 𝑆 ( 𝑝 ) be the (unique) support point ∇𝜉 𝑆 ( 𝑝 ) = 𝑥 𝑆 ( 𝑝 ). Then for every 𝑥 ∈ 𝑆 ,

𝜉 𝑆 ( 𝑝 ) − 𝑝 ⊤𝑥 ≥ 12𝜌 ∥𝑥 − 𝑥 𝑆 ( 𝑝 )∥ 2.

Lemma 7 connects suboptimal points with their objective values. Specifically, the difference in the objective function between the optimal decision and a suboptimal one grows quadratically with the difference in decision vectors, scaled again by the curvature. Lemma 8 uses this to bound support points in different sets under the same direction. 

Lemma 8 (Set stability of support points under Hausdorff perturbations) . Let 𝑆 1, 𝑆 2 ⊂ R𝑑 be nonempty and compact, and let 𝛿 := 𝑑 𝐻 (𝑆 1, 𝑆 2) be the Hausdorff distance induced by ∥ · ∥ . Assume 𝑆 𝑖 is 𝜌 𝑖 -strongly convex for 𝑖 = 1, 2. Then for any 𝑝 ∈ R𝑑 , ∥ 𝑝 ∥ = 1,

∥𝑥 𝑆 1 ( 𝑝 ) − 𝑥 𝑆 2 ( 𝑝 )∥ ≤ 𝛿 + 2√︁ 𝜌 min 𝛿, 

where 𝜌 min := min {𝜌 1, 𝜌 2 }.

Lemma 8 bounds support points with two terms. The first is the Hausdorff distance 𝛿 for the set mismatch, while the second term links the suboptimality of the support points for the other set to closeness in vector space through Lemma 7. Similarly to the general case, we can take advantage of the translation-invariance shown in Lemma 3 to replace Hausdorff with shape distances 𝛿 𝑁 .

Lemma 9 (Bounding linear functionals across two sets under strong convexity) . Let 𝑆 ref , 𝑆 cl ⊂ R𝑑 be nonempty and compact, and let 𝛿 := 𝑑 𝐻 (𝑆 ref , 𝑆 cl ) be the Hausdorff distance induced by ∥ · ∥ . Assume 𝑆 ref is 𝜌 ref -strongly convex and 

𝑆 cl is 𝜌 cl -strongly convex. For any ˆ𝑐 ∈ R𝑑 ,

ˆ𝑐 ⊤  𝑤 ★𝑆 ref (𝑐 ref ) − 𝑤 ★𝑆 cl (𝑐 cl ) ≤ ∥ ˆ𝑐 ∥ · Γ,

where 

Γ = 𝜌 min 

𝑐 ref 

∥𝑐 ref ∥ − 𝑐 cl 

∥𝑐 cl ∥ + 𝛿 + 2√︁ 𝜌 min 𝛿. 

Corollary 1 (Strongly convex feasible sets) . In the setting of Theorem 1, additionally assume that strong convexity of the feasible set (Assumption 4) holds for 𝑆 ref and 𝑆 cl (with radii 𝜌 ref , 𝜌 cl ). Define 𝑇 as the support/objective mismatch term from Theorem 1, 𝑇 := min {𝐷 ref 𝑐 𝑑 + 𝛿 𝑁 (∥ 𝑐 cl − 2 ˆ 𝑐 ∥ + ∥ 𝑐 cl ∥) , 𝐷 cl 𝑐 𝑑 + 𝛿 𝑁 (∥ 𝑐 ref − 2 ˆ 𝑐 ∥ + ∥ 𝑐 ref ∥)} . Then Theorem 1 remains valid with 𝐻 ( ˆ𝑐 ) replaced by 

HSC ( ˆ𝑐 ) := 𝐵 SC ( ˆ𝑐 ) + 𝑇, 

where 

𝐵 SC ( ˆ𝑐 ) := 2∥ ˆ𝑐 ∥ · Γ,

and 

Γ = 𝜌 min 

𝑐 ref 

∥𝑐 ref ∥ − 𝑐 cl 

∥𝑐 cl ∥ + 𝛿 𝑁 + 2√︁ 𝜌 min 𝛿 𝑁 .

9DFFL Under Heterogeneity 

Proof. Proof The proof is identical to Theorem 1, except that in Step 2 apply Lemma 9 in place of Lemma 5, and substitute Hausdorff distances with shape distances due to Lemma 3. Lemma 9 and Corollary 1 replace the general decision shift term of Theorem 1 with a tighter version due to strong convexity. Now, as heterogeneity approaches zero, the heterogeneity term HSC → 0. These findings also align conceptually with Liu and Grigas (2021): under strong convexity, SPO+ is both well-behaved and better calibrated to SPO loss. Here, we also showed that strong convexity benefits federation, since under strong convexity, loss functions between clients degrade more regularly as heterogeneity increases. 

5 Federation Gain Bounds 

5.1 Derivation of the main bound 

We now apply the heterogeneity bounds developed above to analyze when federated learning improves over local learning in the decision-focused setting. We decompose the local versus global model risk difference into a statistical term (where federation helps) and a heterogeneity term (where client heterogeneity hurts). Let 𝑚 ∈ N be the number of clients. Client 𝑗 ∈ { 1, . . . , 𝑚 } holds 𝑛 𝑗 i.i.d. samples from distribution 𝑃 𝑗 over X × R𝑑 .Define the total sample size 𝑁 := Í𝑚 𝑗 =1 𝑛 𝑗 and the mixture weights 𝛼 𝑗 := 𝑛 𝑗 /𝑁 . Each client 𝑗 has a nonempty compact feasible set 𝑆 𝑗 ⊂ R𝑑 with Euclidean diameter 𝐷 𝑗 := 𝐷 𝑆 𝑗 . Let 𝐷 max := max 𝑗 =1,...,𝑚 𝐷 𝑗 . For the pairwise risk comparisons used in this Section, let 𝑋 ∼ 𝑃 𝑋 , where 𝑃 𝑋 is the shared covariate distribution, while client-specific cost vectors (𝐶 (1) , ..., 𝐶 (𝑚 ) ) are jointly distributed conditional on 𝑋 with marginal distributions (𝑋, 𝐶 ( 𝑗 ) ) ∼ 𝑃 𝑗 . Later in Remark 2 and Section 7, we discuss possible alternatives to this joint distribution definition. Let H be a class of predictors 𝑔 : X → R𝑑 . We assume H has bounded outputs: there exists 𝐵 < ∞ such that 

∥𝑔 (𝑥 )∥ ≤ 𝐵 for all 𝑔 ∈ H and 𝑥 ∈ X . For client 𝑗 , define the population SPO+ risk as 

𝑅 𝑗 (𝑔 ) := E( 𝑥,𝑐 )∼ 𝑃 𝑗 

ℓ𝑆 𝑗 (𝑔 (𝑥 ), 𝑐 ),

where ℓ𝑆 𝑗 is the SPO+ loss (2) with feasible set 𝑆 𝑗 . Define the federated mixture risk :

𝑅 mix (𝑔 ) :=

> 𝑚

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =1

𝛼 𝑗 𝑅 𝑗 (𝑔 ),

where 𝛼 𝑗 ≥ 0, Í𝑚 𝑗 =1 𝛼 𝑗 = 1 are the client-mixture weights of client 𝑗 . Let b𝑅 𝑗 (𝑔 ) and b𝑅 mix (𝑔 ) denote the corresponding empirical risks. Define the optimal predictors: 

𝑔 ★𝑗 ∈ arg min  

> 𝑔 ∈ H

𝑅 𝑗 (𝑔 ), 𝑔 ★ 

> mix

∈ arg min  

> 𝑔 ∈ H

𝑅 mix (𝑔 ).

For a class H of vector-valued functions 𝑔 : X → R𝑑 and 𝑛 samples, the Rademacher complexity is 

ℜ𝑛 (H ) := E

"

sup 

> 𝑔 ∈ H

1

𝑛 

> 𝑛

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1
> 𝑑

∑︁ 

> 𝑘 =1

𝜎 𝑖𝑘 𝑔 𝑘 (𝑥 𝑖 )

#

,

where 𝜎 𝑖𝑘 are independent Rademacher random variables. 

Lemma 10 (Uniform convergence for SPO+ risk) . (Liu and Grigas 2021) For any distribution 𝑃 over X × R𝑑 and feasible set 𝑆 with diameter 𝐷 𝑆 , with probability at least 1 − 𝛿 ,

sup 

> 𝑔 ∈ H

𝑅 𝑆 (𝑔 ) − b𝑅 𝑆,𝑛 (𝑔 ) ≤ 4√2 𝐷 𝑆 ℜ𝑛 (H ) + 𝑏 √︂ 2 log (1/𝛿 )

𝑛 ,

10 DFFL Under Heterogeneity 

where 𝑏 = sup ˆ𝑐 ∈ H ( X) ,𝑐 ∈𝐶 ℓ( ˆ𝑐, 𝑐 ) ≤ 𝐷 𝑆 𝐶 max + 2𝐷 𝑆 sup 𝑔 ∈ H ,𝑥 ∈ X ∥𝑔 (𝑥 )∥ for bounded true cost vector norm ∥𝑐 ∥ ≤ 

𝐶 max < ∞.

Define the local and federated statistical complexity terms: 

𝜀 𝑗 (𝑛 𝑗 , 𝛿 ) := 4√2 𝐷 𝑗 ℜ𝑛 𝑗 (H ) + 𝑏 √︄ 2 log (1/𝛿 )

𝑛 𝑗 

,𝜀 mix (𝑁, 𝛿 ) := 4√2 𝐷 max ℜ𝑁 (H ) + 𝑏 √︂ 2 log (1/𝛿 )

𝑁 .

The key quantity measuring heterogeneity is the following term, which we refer to as Client–mixture discrepancy. For client 𝑗 , define 

Δ 𝑗 := sup 

> 𝑔 ∈ H

𝑅 𝑗 (𝑔 ) − 𝑅 mix (𝑔 ) . (5) This quantity captures how misaligned client 𝑗 ’s objective is with the federated mixture objective. We now present the main result of this section, which in essence states that the federated model helps client 𝑗 if pooled data sample complexity gains (𝜀 𝑗 − 𝜀 mix ) exceed the client’s heterogeneity penalty Δ 𝑗 .

Theorem 2 (SPO+ Federation Gain Bound) . Let ˆ𝑔 loc  

> 𝑗

be the ERM on client 𝑗 :

ˆ𝑔 loc  

> 𝑗

∈ arg min 

> 𝑔 ∈ H

b𝑅 𝑗 (𝑔 ),

and let ˆ𝑔 fed be the ERM on the pooled mixture objective: 

ˆ𝑔 fed ∈ arg min 

> 𝑔 ∈ H

b𝑅 mix (𝑔 ).

With probability at least 1 − 𝛿 over all data: 

(Local bound) 

𝑅 𝑗 ( ˆ𝑔 loc  

> 𝑗

) − 𝑅 𝑗 (𝑔 ★𝑗 ) ≤ 2 𝜀 𝑗 



𝑛 𝑗 , 𝛿 

2



. (6) 

(Federated bound) 

𝑅 𝑗 ( ˆ𝑔 fed ) − 𝑅 𝑗 (𝑔 ★𝑗 ) ≤ 2 𝜀 mix 



𝑁, 𝛿 

2



+ 2Δ 𝑗 . (7) The proof of Theorem 2 follows from the ERM argument 𝑅 ( ˆ𝑔 ) ≤ b𝑅 ( ˆ𝑔 ) + 𝜀 𝑗 (see Shalev-Shwartz and Ben-David (2014)) and Lemma 10. A formal proof can be found in the Appendix, Section B. 

Remark 1 (When federation helps) . Define the certified federation gain for client 𝑗 as FG 𝑗, cert := 𝜀 𝑗 (𝑛 𝑗 , 𝛿 /2)

𝜀 mix (𝑁, 𝛿 /2) + Δ 𝑗 

.

If FG 𝑗, cert > 1, then the certified bound for federated learning is tighter than the certified bound for local learning on client 𝑗 . Equivalently, federation has a tighter guarantee for client 𝑗 whenever 

Δ 𝑗 < 𝜀 𝑗 (𝑛 𝑗 , 𝛿 /2) − 𝜀 mix (𝑁, 𝛿 /2). (8) That is, the heterogeneity penalty must be smaller than the statistical gap between local and pooled training. Intuitively, Δ 𝑗 measures how ’atypical’ client 𝑗 is compared to the pooled population. If it looks like the mixture, Δ 𝑗 

is small and the pooled statistical advantage will dominate, proportional to the gain in statistical complexity. 

11 DFFL Under Heterogeneity 

Proposition 1 (Bounding Δ 𝑗 via heterogeneity) . Suppose all clients share a common feature distribution, and let 

H𝑖 𝑗 ( ˆ𝑐 ) denote the fixed-prediction discrepancy bound from Theorem 1 between clients 𝑖 and 𝑗 . Then 

Δ 𝑗 ≤

> 𝑚

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1

𝛼 𝑖 sup 

> 𝑔 ∈ H

E( 𝑥,𝐶 (𝑖 ) ,𝐶 ( 𝑗 ) )∼ 𝑃 𝑖 𝑗 

H𝑖 𝑗 (𝑔 (𝑥 ))  .

The proof can be found in Appendix B. In Appendix Section A.3 we describe how we estimate ˆ Δ 𝑗 through the bound in Proposition 1 and the statistical complexity terms 𝜀 , which makes it possible to employ Remark 1 and Theorem 2. We show a specific use case for the experimental instances in Section 6 and compare the theoretical criteria to the empirical results. 

Remark 2 (Heterogeneous feature distributions via optimal transport) . Section 5’s definitions specify a coupling through a shared latent variable. More generally, one could optimize over couplings, and taking the infimum over all valid couplings would yield a bound in terms of an optimal-transport distance between client distributions. However, determining the appropriate conditions for H and 𝑃 𝑖 is not simple, due to the dependency on the prediction 𝑔 (𝑥 ) and 

𝑐 (𝑖 ) , 𝑐 ( 𝑗 ) , 𝑆 𝑖 , 𝑆 𝑗 , but is nevertheless an interesting direction that would link DFFL to covariate-shift literature in FL, which we discuss further in Section 7. 

5.2 Connection to estimation-based federation gain 

We now show that controlling prediction error controls SPO+ excess risk, so existing minimax estimation results immediately imply corresponding guarantees for SPO+ federation gain. 

Lemma 11 (Prediction heterogeneity via Lipschitzness of ℓSPO +). Let 𝑆 ⊂ R𝑑 be a bounded feasible region with diameter 𝐷 𝑆 < ∞. Fix any realized cost vector 𝑐 ∈ R𝑑 . Then the SPO+ loss is Lipschitz in the prediction argument: for all ˆ𝑐 1, ˆ𝑐 2 ∈ R𝑑 ,

ℓ𝑆  

> SPO +

( ˆ𝑐 1, 𝑐 ) − ℓ𝑆  

> SPO +

( ˆ𝑐 2, 𝑐 ) ≤ 2𝐷 𝑆 ∥ ˆ𝑐 1 − ˆ𝑐 2 ∥.

Corollary 2 (From estimation gain to SPO+ gain) . (Ho-Nguyen and Kılınc ¸-Karzan 2022). Let ˆ𝑓 be a predictor (local or federated) and 𝑓 ★𝑗 be the optimal predictor for client 𝑗 . By Lemma 11, 

E𝑅 𝑗 ( ˆ𝑓 ) − 𝑅 𝑗 ( 𝑓 ★𝑗 ) ≤ 2𝐷 𝑗 · E∥ ˆ𝑓 (𝑥 ) − 𝑓 ★𝑗 (𝑥 )∥  ≤ 2𝐷 𝑗 √︃ E∥ ˆ𝑓 (𝑥 ) − 𝑓 ★𝑗 (𝑥 )∥ 2 .

Consequently, if the squared estimation error satisfies E[∥ ˆ𝑓 − 𝑓 ★𝑗 ∥2] ≤ 𝑅 (est ) 

> 𝑗

, then 

E𝑅 𝑗 ( ˆ𝑓 ) − 𝑅 𝑗 ( 𝑓 ★𝑗 ) ≤ 2𝐷 𝑗 √︃ 𝑅 (est ) 

> 𝑗

.

Therefore, if FG est  

> 𝑗

denotes the ratio of local to federated minimax estimation risks, then 

FG SPO + 

> 𝑗, bound

≳√︃ FG est  

> 𝑗

.

Corollary 2 tells us that by defining a ratio of risk upper bounds, FG SPO + 

> 𝑗, bound

= local SPO+ risk upper bound fed. SPO+ risk upper bound ,

we can relate the bounds to an upper bound of the squared estimation risk, here the minimax risk. We use ≳ to account for potential constants in the minimax risks, but the key takeaway is that SPO+ federated gain scales with a rate equivalent to the square root of the MSE minimax risk ratio. In other words, controlling prediction error controls SPO+ excess risk, and a factor of 𝑘 improvement in minimax MSE translates to a factor of √𝑘 improvement in the SPO+ risk bound. 

12 DFFL Under Heterogeneity 

Table 2: Summary of gain scaling 

Quantity Polyhedral Strongly Convex 

Estimation gain FG est  

> 𝑗

FG est 

> 𝑗

SPO+ bound gain (FG est  

> 𝑗

)1/2 (FG est  

> 𝑗

)1/2

SPO bound gain (FG est  

> 𝑗

)1/4 (FG est  

> 𝑗

)1/2

In Su et al. (2023), the authors provide a minimax estimation gain bound under a subspace heterogeneity model. Plugging their result into Corollary 2 provides a lower bound as a function of local sample size, total sample size, ambient dimension, noise level, and a heterogeneity term Γ. We defer the full expression to Remark 4 in Appendix Section C. 

Remark 3 (Interpretation of Federated Gain Ratios) . FG 𝑗, cert is a PAC certified gain: it compares our high-probability excess-risk upper bounds (local vs federated + heterogeneity penalty). In contrast, FG SPO + 

> 𝑗, bound

comes from relating expectations of SPO+ risk to prediction estimation error and then using the minimax estimation gain comparisons, i.e., it should be interpreted as a scaling measure, and not as a certificate of the same type. 

5.3 Extension to SPO 

The SPO+ loss is a surrogate for the true SPO loss. Liu and Grigas (2021) establish a calibration relationship that allows us to convert SPO+ bounds to SPO bounds for the federated case. 

Definition 2 (SPO regret) . The SPO regret of predictor 𝑔 on client 𝑗 is 

𝑅 SPO  

> 𝑗

(𝑔 ) := E( 𝑥,𝑐 )∼ 𝑃 𝑗 

𝑐 ⊤𝑤 ★𝑆 𝑗 (𝑔 (𝑥 )) − 𝑧 ★𝑆 𝑗 (𝑐 ) .

Theorem 3 (Calibration) . (Liu and Grigas 2021) (i) General (polyhedral) case: There exists a calibration function 𝜓 such that 

𝑅 SPO  

> 𝑗

(𝑔 ) − 𝑅 SPO  

> 𝑗

(𝑔 ★𝑗 ) ≤ 𝜓  𝑅 𝑗 (𝑔 ) − 𝑅 𝑗 (𝑔 ★𝑗 ),

with 𝜓 (𝜀 ) = 𝑂 (√𝜀 ) in the polyhedral case. This yields SPO excess risk of order 𝑂 (𝑛 −1/4).(ii) Strongly convex feasible set: Under Assumption 4, the calibration becomes linear: 𝜓 (𝜀 ) = 𝑂 (𝜀 ). This yields SPO excess risk of order 𝑂 (𝑛 −1/2).

Corollary 3 (SPO federation gain) . Define the SPO federation gain ratio analogously to the SPO+ case. Then: (i) Polyhedral case: 

FG SPO  

> 𝑗, bound

≈√︃ FG SPO + 

> 𝑗, bound

≈  FG est 

> 𝑗

1/4.

(ii) Strongly convex case: 

FG SPO  

> 𝑗, bound

≈ FG SPO + 

> 𝑗, bound

≈  FG est 

> 𝑗

1/2.

Table 2 summarizes the chain of conversions. Strong convexity of the feasible set removes one square root in the SPO →SPO+ calibration step by making the optimizer stable (Corollary 1). 

5.4 SPO+ as a Bregman Divergence 

It is worth observing that by observing the fact that SPO+ is a Bregman Divergence of the support function and under Assumption 2, we can achieve another calibration bound on the excess SPO+ risk with MSE, albeit not as generally as in Corollary 2. We present the result informally in Eq. (9) and a detailed version in Proposition 2 in the Appendix, 

13 DFFL Under Heterogeneity 

Section C. 

𝑅 SPO + ( ˆ𝑓 ) − 𝑅 SPO + ( 𝑓 ★𝑗 ) ≤ 2

𝜌 MSE 𝑗 ( ˆ𝑓 ). (9) Eq. (9) shows that when the feasible set 𝑆 is strongly convex, SPO+ behaves like a smooth quadratic loss in the cost-prediction error. This is a precursor for our experimental results: clients with strongly convex feasible sets benefit more from federation and are less sensitive to heterogeneity than those with polyhedral sets. 

Another takeaway is the geometric intuition: as a Bregman divergence of the support function, strong convexity and therefore smoothness of the support function implies SPO+ is bounded above by a quadratic. It is important to note that Eq. (9) is an excess risk bound by raw MSE bound, not excess MSE. While this is still useful as an upper bound, to get a true excess to excess bound we would need a stronger realizability assumption, or a no Bayes noise assumption on the mapping 𝑓 ★(X) ↦ → C .

6 Computational Experiments 

6.1 Implementation details 

We follow the synchronous FedAvg (McMahan et al. 2017) round or episode structure, and the original FedAvg 

procedure and notation (see Algorithm 1 and Algorithm 2 in the Appendix, Section A.2). We replace the local loss function with ℓSPO+ and local gradients with the decision-focused update (Elmachtoub and Grigas 2022). We use the Adam optimizer ( 𝜂 = 10 −3) with gradient clipping ( 𝑐 = 1) for local updates. We then aggregate client updates by sample counts, as in the original algorithm. For each configuration, we train both a federated and local models for each client using a shallow neural network structure with ReLU activation function ( 𝑥 → 8 → 64 → 50 → ℓ2clip (𝜏 ) → ˆ𝑐 ). We apply ℓ2-norm clipping on the output vector, by multiplying the model output ˆ 𝑐 by min (1, 𝜏    

> ∥ˆ𝑐 ∥+ 𝜖

), where 𝜖 > 0and 𝜏 = 20. We set the number of clients to 20. All experiments were implemented in Julia (Bezanson et al. 2017). We employ the Lux.jl framework to construct and train the neural networks (Pal 2023) and we compute parameter gradients using the Zygote.jl reverse mode automatic differentiation system (Innes et al. 2019). We perform experiments across two downstream optimization problems: a fractional knapsack model representing the polyhedral case, and an entropy-bound portfolio optimization model as a strongly convex example. The fractional knapsack follows Ho-Nguyen and Kılınc ¸-Karzan (2022). Here, each client 𝑗 solves min   

> 𝑤 ∈𝑤 ∈ [ 0,1]𝑚

n

(− 𝑐 𝑗 )𝑇 𝑤 𝑎 𝑇 𝑤 ≤ 𝐵 𝑗 

o

where 𝑎 are the item weights, and 𝐵 𝑗 is the client’s total allocated budget. Entropy-constrained portfolio problem follows Liu and Grigas (2021), where it was used to evaluate the performance of the original SPO+. In this case, each client 𝑗 solves min  

> 𝑤 ∈R𝑚

n

𝑐 𝑇 𝑗 𝑤 𝑤 ≥ 0,

> 𝑚

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1

𝑤 𝑖 = 1,

> 𝑚

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1

𝑤 𝑖 log 𝑤 𝑖 ≤ 𝑟 𝑗 

o

,

where 𝑟 𝑗 is the threshold of entropy of portfolio 𝑤 for client 𝑗 . It can be seen that the formulation is strongly convex when restricted to the simplex Í𝑚 𝑖 =1 𝑤 𝑖 = 1. Both formulations allow for a direct polynomial solution, which is necessary for us to be able to perform the required scale of experiments. The fractional knapsack is solved with the greedy approach, by simply sorting the items according to profit-to-weight ratio and adding them until reaching the allowed budget. The entropy-constrained portfolio optimization solution can be obtained by solving the KKT conditions, which result in 

𝑥 𝑖 = 𝑒 − 𝑐 𝑖 𝑏 

Í𝑑 𝑗 𝑒 − 𝑐 𝑗 𝑏 

,

14 DFFL Under Heterogeneity No Data Imbalance With Data Imbalance Objective Heterogeneity Constraint Heterogeneity Relative regret 0.00 0.02 0.04 100% 100% 60% 0% 0.00 0.02 0.04 100% 75% 50% 0% Heterogeneity level 0.0 0.25 0.5 1.0 Relative regret 0.00 0.02 0.04 35% 15% 15% 5% Heterogeneity level 0.0 0.25 0.5 1.0 Relative regret 0.00 0.02 0.04 50% 50% 50% 45% Federated Local                  

> (a) Federated versus local performance for the knapsack experiment. No Data Imbalance With Data Imbalance Objective Heterogeneity Constraint Heterogeneity Relative regret 0.0 0.1 0.2 100% 100% 100% 0% 0.0 0.1 0.2 100% 100% 50% 0% Heterogeneity level 0.0 0.25 0.5 1.0 Relative regret 0.0 0.1 0.2 95% 100% 100% 100% Heterogeneity level 0.0 0.25 0.5 1.0 Relative regret 0.0 0.1 0.2 50% 50% 50% 50% Federated Local (b) Federated versus local performance for the portfolio experiment.

Figure 2: Boxplots of the relative regret for the two synthetic experimental settings. The orange boxplots correspond to local model performance, and the blue boxplots to federated model performance. Above each pair of boxplots is the fraction of clients with a lower regret under federated learning. Under no data imbalance, each client has the same sample size. Under data imbalance, half the clients have 10 times more samples than the rest of the federation. Each point in the boxplots corresponds to one client, averaged across 5 seeds. where 𝑑 = |𝑐 |, which can be solved by bisection, resulting in an approximation of the globally optimal solution. Bisection accuracy threshold is set to 10 −10 .

6.2 Synthetic Experiment Results 

We first present results on synthetically generated data. Heterogeneity is introduced along two axes: objective heterogeneity , through client-specific perturbations of the feature-to-cost mapping 𝑥 ↦ → 𝑐 , and constraint heterogeneity ,through client-specific feasible-set parameters (budgets in the knapsack problem and entropy thresholds in the portfolio problem). We also vary data balance across clients. In the No Data Imbalance setting, all clients share the same sample size; in the With Data Imbalance setting, half of the clients have 10 times fewer samples. Detailed methodology for generating the data and heterogeneity is described in Appendix Section A.1. Figs. 2a and 2b depict the distribution of relative regret (regret normalized by the average true objective) per client, averaged across five seeds, while varying the scales of objective and constraint heterogeneity ranging from 0 to 1. As we discuss below, the two problems respond differently to heterogeneity, with the geometry of the feasible region playing a significant role. For the fractional knapsack experiments (polyhedral feasible set) in the balanced-data setting, constraint heterogeneity primarily increases the variance of regret across clients without substantially shifting the mean, for both local and federated models, though the federated model achieves overall better performance at low objective heterogeneity. Objective heterogeneity, by contrast, has an asymmetric effect: local models are largely unaffected, as each learns its own mapping, but federated models degrade significantly. As the covariate-to-cost mapping shifts between clients, the benefit of pooling data diminishes, and at maximum objective heterogeneity 100% of clients prefer local models. With data imbalance, local models exhibit high variance, driven by the data-scarce clients, as opposed to federated models, which perform better and with lower variance when heterogeneity is low. As objective heterogeneity increases, 

15 DFFL Under Heterogeneity 

performance deterioration is faster than in the balanced case: even moderate heterogeneity leads data-rich clients to prefer local models, whereas data-scarce clients continue to benefit from federation up to moderate levels. Data-rich clients, by comparison, see only minimal gains from federation even in homogeneous configurations and experience significant relative degradation at high heterogeneity. Constraint heterogeneity again predominantly affects variance rather than mean regret. This is corroborated by the figures in Appendix C.1, which provide a more detailed, client-level account of the improvement (or deterioration) due to federation. These reveal an interaction between the two heterogeneity axes: in the absence of significant objective heterogeneity, constraint heterogeneity primarily amplifies variance in the regret gap. However, even moderate objective noise allows differences in feasible sets to substantially degrade federated performance in this polyhedral setting. In the case of balanced sample sizes, over 70% prefer federation in almost every configuration, except the extreme case of maximum heterogeneity on both axes, where only 40% of clients benefit. The portfolio experiments , whose feasible region is strongly convex, exhibit significantly different behavior. As shown in Fig. 2b, federated models almost always achieve both lower mean regret and substantially lower variance than local models. Without data imbalance, federated performance is largely insensitive to constraint heterogeneity, with only a significant degradation at maximum objective heterogeneity. Local models, meanwhile, show increasing inter-client variance as constraint heterogeneity grows. With data imbalance, data-rich clients tend to prefer local models, as in the knapsack case, but the strong convexity of the portfolio problem makes federation more robust to objective heterogeneity overall and significantly reduces variance across clients. Slope grid figures in Appendix C.1 provide further corroboration. Comparing the two settings, we can draw several conclusions. First, the geometry of the feasible region matters substantially: when the downstream optimization is strongly convex, federation remains beneficial for most clients even under relatively high heterogeneity. When the feasible set is polyhedral, as in the knapsack case, federation is beneficial only under moderate heterogeneity, and the interaction between objective and constraint heterogeneity can further erode its value. Second, data imbalance consistently increases the attractiveness of federation for data-scarce clients, who benefit from pooled sample sizes even when heterogeneity is nontrivial. Data-rich clients, conversely, are quicker to prefer local models as heterogeneity grows. As discussed earlier, the proposed FG Ratio can serve as a decision rule for determining whether joining a federation is likely to be beneficial. To evaluate its alignment with actual regret outcomes, we compute the FG Difference 

𝜀 𝑗 − 𝜀 mix − ˆΔ 𝑗 and compare it with the empirical regret difference ˆ𝑅 𝑗 − ˆ𝑅 mix . The results, shown in Figure 3, confirm that the strongly convex portfolio setting is more predictable (76.2% agreement) than the polyhedral knapsack (50.6%). In the unbalanced-data scenario, the FG ratio is less reliable for both problems (66.2% for portfolio, 42.2% for knapsack), though the portfolio problem continues to exhibit more regular behavior. Overall, the FG ratio provides a useful heuristic, although it tends to overestimate the benefits of federation in heterogeneous scenarios. 

6.3 Case study: PJM Energy Markets 

Energy markets operations often result in difficult optimization and machine learning problems, due to the need to solve large-scale optimization problems under uncertainty, driven by demand variability and increasing renewable penetration (Bo and Li 2009). At the same time, operational data are often siloed across market participants and subject to strict regulatory requirements. For example, the North American Electric Reliability Corporation (NERC) Critical Infrastructure Protection standard (CIP 011-04) specifies protections for sensitive system information (North American Electric Reliability Corporation 2019). These constraints can motivate distributed and privacy-aware optimization approaches, where techniques such as federated learning enable coordination across entities without requiring centralized data sharing. For this set of experiments, we consider agents making decisions based on real-time electricity price, specifically employing hourly energy pricing data from the PJM Interconnection, a regional organization that manages the flow of electricity across 13 U.S. states (PJM Interconnection, L.L.C. 2025). We retrieve the hourly regional day-ahead energy 

16 DFFL Under Heterogeneity Real Difference (Local - Fed)     

> −0.2 −0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2 FG Difference  (Loc_Comp - Δⱼ − Fed_Comp)
> −1000 01000

Knapsack Agreement Ratio : 50.6%    

> Real Difference (Local - Fed)
> −0.2 0.0 0.2 0100 200 300

Portfolio Agreement Ratio : 76.2%    

> agree ✓disagree ✗

(a) Balanced data sample sizes between clients. Real Difference (Local - Fed)     

> −0.2 −0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2 FG Difference  (Loc_Comp - Δⱼ − Fed_Comp)
> −1000 01000 2000 3000

Knapsack Agreement Ratio : 42.2%    

> Real Difference (Local - Fed)
> −0.25 0.00 0.25 0200 400

Portfolio Agreement Ratio : 66.2%    

> agree ✓disagree ✗

(b) Imbalanced data sample sizes between clients. 

Figure 3: Scatter plot of the computed FG Difference on the y-axis versus the empirical regret difference from the experiments. We plot one scatter plot for the knapsack experiment and one for the portfolio, with the ratio of agreement (percent of samples where both the FG Difference and the real difference share a sign) appearing in each subtitle. The top row corresponds to the balanced data regime, and the bottom row the imbalanced data. 

17 DFFL Under Heterogeneity Jan 2025 Feb 2025 Mar 2025 May 2025 Jun 2025 Aug 2025 Sep 2025 Nov 2025 Dec 2025 Total LMP ($/MWh) 050 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450 -90° -89° -88° -87° -86° -85° -84° -83° -82° -81° -80° -79° -78° -77° -76° -75° -74° -73° -72° -71° -70° 38° 39° 40° 41° 42° 43°     

> AECO AEP APS ATSI BGE COMED DAY DEOK DOM DPL DUQ JCPL METED PECO PENELEC PEPCO PPL PSEG RECO
> Congestion Price 95th Percentile ($/MWh) 25 50 75 100 7-day rolling mean
> 4 MW 6 MW 8 MW 10 MW 12 MW
> Daily Customer Demand

Figure 4: Visualization of the data distribution of the energy pricing, and the volatility of the pricing among clients. The size of the nodes corresponds to the hours of energy production the client must satisfy, and the color corresponds to the 95th quantile of the client’s congestion pricing. prices for the year 2025. We then decompose the prices into a mean price and a per-client congestion term, which matches real-world pricing regimes (Litvinov et al. 2004). Covariates are represented by the weather data, which has been employed in the literature as a strong predictor for locational marginal pricing for energy (LMP), which we retrieve through the Open-Meteo API (Hong et al. 2020, Zippenfenig 2023). The covariates include minimum, maximum, and mean temperature, mean humidity, mean wind speed, mean and max solar irradiance, as well as the day of the week. To avoid time-series forecasting challenges, we do not use any historical pricing data as covariates. For each client 𝑗 ,we use six months of data for training and evaluate performance on the remainder of the year. We use a shallow neural net for prediction with 256 neurons. We use twice as many episodes and local epochs per client to account for the increased difficulty of the task. The training parameters are otherwise identical to the ones used for synthetic data. We assume that each PJM zone has a decision-making agent that solves a daily energy purchasing problem. We arbitrarily assign agent demand levels to each zone, corresponding to 4 to 12 hour-long blocks. Figure 4 depicts zone (agent) locations and corresponding labels and assigned demand levels. The downstream decision problem is to satisfy the daily demand by purchasing on the day-ahead market, i.e., each agent 𝑗 commits to selecting a subset of 𝐵 𝑗 

hour blocks in the next 24 hours based on available covariate context (weather forecast), such that the realized cost is minimal. Formally, let 𝑆 𝑗 = {𝑤 ∈ [ 0, 1]𝑚 : 1𝑇 𝑤 = 𝐵 𝑗 } be the feasible set of client 𝑗 , where 𝐵 𝑗 is the client 𝑗 total daily demand and 𝑚 = 24 hours. The client then solves, min 𝑤 ∈𝑆 𝑗 𝑐 𝑇 𝑗 𝑤, where 𝑐 𝑗 is the vector of hourly energy prices. This defines a fractional-knapsack-type problem, and the prediction model is used to identify the cheapest production hours each day. For example, it could represent determining a daily scheduling of appliances or EV charging. Importantly, note that as formulated, the agents significantly differ in their feasible regions ( 𝐵 𝑗 ) and objective coefficients (different prices at different nodes of the network). 

18 DFFL Under Heterogeneity 

The results are shown in Figure 5. On average, federation seems to provide no real advantage over local models (mean absolute regret: federated 45 .44, local 46 .12. However, the intra-federation results show a large diversity. Some clients achieve significant gains while federating, such as DOM who achieves a 10% reduction in regret when federating, while the worst performing client, PENELEC, loses approximately 6% in downstream regret when switching from a local model (Figure 5). Detailed results per client are also given in Table 3. Table 3: Detailed results of the PJM case study. DFL LOC : The downstream regret for each client when using SPO+ with a local-only model. DFL FED : The downstream regret for each client when using SPO+ with a federated learning model. 𝚫 𝑗 : The difference DFL LOC − DFL FED . 𝚫 𝑗 %: The percent difference 𝚫 𝑗 /DFL LOC . 𝑭𝑮 Δ: The estimated FG difference, according to Remark 1 for each client. 

Client DFL LOC DFL FED 𝚫 𝑗 𝑭𝑮 Δ 𝚫 𝑗 %

DOM 15.08 13.57 1.51 808.53 10.01 

PEPCO 14.69 13.59 1.10 852.12 7.49 

PPL 68.26 64.10 4.16 1076.13 6.09 

DUQ 48.08 45.70 2.39 575.56 4.96 

BGE 15.23 14.59 0.65 1064.57 4.24 

AECO 49.12 47.12 2.00 590.53 4.08 

ATSI 39.06 37.77 1.29 279.61 3.31 

RECO 62.85 61.01 1.84 861.56 2.93 

PSEG 60.38 58.73 1.65 867.05 2.73 

DPL 48.96 47.63 1.33 1084.94 2.72 

DAY 37.73 36.81 0.92 277.06 2.43 

METED 58.92 57.98 0.95 1336.40 1.61 

JCPL 59.24 58.32 0.92 864.73 1.55 

APS 44.65 44.28 0.36 1277.67 0.82 

DEOK 53.09 53.26 -0.17 589.76 -0.31 

AEP 58.25 58.54 -0.29 595.34 -0.49 

COMED 32.61 34.13 -1.52 115.69 -4.66 

PECO 48.63 51.32 -2.69 576.66 -5.52 

PENELEC 61.49 65.05 -3.57 582.10 -5.80 We also compute the FG Ratio Difference for each client, according to the methodology in Section A.3, and show the results in Fig. 11. We find that the accuracy aligns with our synthetic experiments, 14/19 clients are correctly identified as likely to benefit from federation, and 5 are misattributed to benefit (versus 50.6% in the synthetic knapsack, Figure 3). We believe that this showcases the potential of DFFL. Despite a simple implementation with FedAvg-based aggregation, no personalization, with polyhedral feasible sets and a complex prediction task, DFFL performed relatively well for a subset of the clients and even in the worst case, did not significantly negatively impact regret. We discuss in Section 7 how this result could be further improved with heterogeneity-aware algorithms for DFFL. −10 −5 0 5 10 % change (DFL Fed vs DFL Local) PENELEC PECO COMED AEP DEOK APS JCPL METED DAY DPL PSEG RECO ATSI AECO BGE DUQ PPL PEPCO DOM 

Figure 5: The % improvement in downstream regret across the different agents in the PJM experiments. 

19 DFFL Under Heterogeneity 

7 Conclusions and Future Work 

In this paper, we presented Decision-Focused Federated Learning with SPO+, and derived upper bounds for the pointwise loss between clients under different axes of heterogeneity. We showcased how the bounds behave in both the general and the strongly convex cases, and presented a simple example to demonstrate the intuition behind the tighter bounds. We then extended the bounds to SPO+ regret bounds between clients, derived a heuristic FG Ratio criterion, and showed how federated gains translate to downstream client regret. Finally, we developed an extensive experimentation suite, introducing heterogeneity across objectives, constraints, and data to connect our theoretical findings with empirical results. We also connect our FG Ratio rule with empirical federated gains on downstream regret, and discussed its utility as a decision rule for prospective federation clients. A number of potential future research directions can be identified. One immediate extension would be to incorporate a more sophisticated solution algorithm or approaches to include personalization. We have considered a simple person-alization regime, where each client’s model was fine-tuned to their personal data, but found a naive implementation to perform worse than the baseline FedAvg . Identifying a heterogeneity-aware algorithm for DFFL is non-trivial: besides fine-tuning, one must evaluate freezing certain layers, adding learning rate scheduling, appending personalization layers to the trained model, and adapting the heterogeneity FL algorithms to the client optimization model heterogeneity presented here. Another valuable addition would be relaxing our i.i.d. assumptions in Proposition 1. In practice, clients also present a covariate shift, meaning their data does not necessarily come from the same distribution. While this has been studied extensively in the FL literature, it is not clear how it can be easily incorporated into this analysis. Using existing work on total variation or Wasserstein distances between the covariates could be a promising approach. Finally, extending DFFL to more classes of models, more modalities of input data, different downstream optimization models, or even different models per client could be an exciting avenue for future work. With the advent of LLMs and foundation models, training a model to prescribe solutions for a domain task while incorporating text, image, and tabular data could be a important as well. 

Acknowledgments 

This work was completed in part with resources provided by the Auburn University Easley Cluster. 

20 DFFL Under Heterogeneity 

References 

Brandon Amos and J Zico Kolter. Optnet: Differentiable optimization as a layer in neural networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 136–145. PMLR, 2017. Sean Augenstein, H Brendan McMahan, Daniel Ramage, Swaroop Ramaswamy, Peter Kairouz, Mingqing Chen, Rajiv Mathews, and Blaise Aguera y Arcas. Generative models for effective ml on private, decentralized datasets. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2020. Turgay Ayer, Can Zhang, Anthony Bonifonte, Anne C Spaulding, and Jagpreet Chhatwal. Prioritizing hepatitis c treatment in us prisons. Operations Research , 67(3):853–873, 2019. Gah-Yi Ban and Cynthia Rudin. The big data newsvendor: Practical insights from machine learning. Operations Research , 67(1): 90–108, 2019. Dimitris Bertsimas and Nathan Kallus. From predictive to prescriptive analytics. Management Science , 66(3):1025–1044, 2020. Dimitris Bertsimas and Nihal Koduri. Data-driven optimization: A reproducing kernel hilbert space approach. Operations Research ,70(1):454–471, 2022. Jeff Bezanson, Alan Edelman, Stefan Karpinski, and Viral B Shah. Julia: A fresh approach to numerical computing. SIAM Review ,59(1):65–98, 2017. Rui Bo and Fangxing Li. Probabilistic lmp forecasting considering load uncertainty. IEEE Transactions on Power Systems , 24(3): 1279–1289, 2009. Stephen Boyd and Lieven Vandenberghe. Convex Optimization . Cambridge university press, 2004. Alberto Caprara and Ulrich Pferschy. Worst-case analysis of the subset sum algorithm for bin packing. Operations Research Letters ,32(2):159–166, 2004. Du Chen and Geoffrey A Chua. An algorithmic approach to managing supply chain data security: The differentially private newsvendor. Operations Research , 2025. Li Chen, Melvyn Sim, Xun Zhang, Long Zhao, and Minglong Zhou. Robust actionable prescriptive analytics. Operations Research ,74(1):550–571, 2026. Justin Domke. Implicit differentiation by perturbation. In Proceedings of the 24th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , pages 523–531, 2010. Othman El Balghiti, Adam N Elmachtoub, Paul Grigas, and Ambuj Tewari. Generalization bounds in the predict-then-optimize framework. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 32, 2019. Adam N Elmachtoub and Paul Grigas. Smart “predict, then optimize”. Management Science , 68(1):9–26, 2022. Adam N Elmachtoub, Jason Cheuk Nam Liang, and Ryan McNellis. Decision trees for decision-making under the predict-then-optimize framework. In International conference on machine learning , pages 2858–2867. PMLR, 2020. Alireza Fallah, Aryan Mokhtari, and Asuman Ozdaglar. Personalized federated learning with theoretical guarantees: A model-agnostic meta-learning approach. Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:3557–3568, 2020. Adrian Flanagan, Were Oyomno, Alexander Grigorievskiy, Kuan E Tan, Suleiman A Khan, and Muhammad Ammad-Ud-Din. Federated multi-view matrix factorization for personalized recommendations. In Joint European conference on machine learning and knowledge discovery in databases , pages 324–347. Springer, 2020. Dashan Gao, Xin Yao, and Qiang Yang. A survey on heterogeneous federated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.04505 , 2022. Hubert Halkin. Implicit functions and optimization problems without continuous differentiability of the data. SIAM Journal on Control , 12(2):229–236, 1974. Nam Ho-Nguyen and Fatma Kılınc ¸-Karzan. Risk guarantees for end-to-end prediction and optimization processes. Management Science , 68(12):8680–8698, 2022. Ying-Yi Hong, Jonathan V Taylar, and Arnel C Fajardo. Locational marginal price forecasting in a day-ahead power market using spatiotemporal deep learning network. Sustainable Energy, Grids and Networks , 24:100406, 2020. Mike Innes, Alan Edelman, Keno Fischer, Chris Rackauckas, Elliot Saba, Viral B Shah, and Will Tebbutt. A differentiable programming system to bridge machine learning and scientific computing. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.07587 , 2019. Jihwan Jeong, Parth Jaggi, Andrew Butler, and Scott Sanner. An exact symbolic reduction of linear smart predict+ optimize to mixed integer linear programming. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 10053–10067. PMLR, 2022. 

21 DFFL Under Heterogeneity 

Peter Kairouz, H Brendan McMahan, Brendan Avent, Aur´ elien Bellet, Mehdi Bennis, Arjun Nitin Bhagoji, Kallista Bonawitz, Zachary Charles, Graham Cormode, Rachel Cummings, et al. Advances and open problems in federated learning. Foundations and trends ® in Machine Learning , 14(1–2):1–210, 2021. Rohit Kannan, G¨ uzin Bayraksan, and James R Luedtke. Data-driven sample average approximation with covariate information. 

Operations Research , 73(6):3245–3259, 2025. Sai Praneeth Karimireddy, Satyen Kale, Mehryar Mohri, Sashank Reddi, Sebastian Stich, and Ananda Theertha Suresh. Scaffold: Stochastic controlled averaging for federated learning. In International conference on machine learning , pages 5132–5143. PMLR, 2020. Hans Kellerer, Ulrich Pferschy, and David Pisinger. The subset sum problem. In Knapsack problems , pages 73–115. Springer, 2004. Ahmed Khaled, Konstantin Mishchenko, and Peter Richt´ arik. Tighter theory for local sgd on identical and heterogeneous data. In 

International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics , pages 4519–4529. PMLR, 2020. Sajad Khodadadian, Pranay Sharma, Gauri Joshi, and Siva Theja Maguluri. Federated reinforcement learning: Linear speedup under markovian sampling. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 10997–11057. PMLR, 2022. James Kotary, Ferdinando Fioretto, Pascal Van Hentenryck, and Bryan Wilder. End-to-end constrained optimization learning: A survey. In International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence , 2021. Qiongxiu Li, Wenrui Yu, Yufei Xia, and Jun Pang. From centralized to decentralized federated learning: Theoretical insights, privacy preservation, and robustness challenges. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.07505 , 2025. Tian Li, Anit Kumar Sahu, Manzil Zaheer, Maziar Sanjabi, Ameet Talwalkar, and Virginia Smith. Federated optimization in heterogeneous networks. Proceedings of Machine learning and systems , 2:429–450, 2020a. Tian Li, Shengyuan Hu, Ahmad Beirami, and Virginia Smith. Ditto: Fair and robust federated learning through personalization. In 

International conference on machine learning , pages 6357–6368. PMLR, 2021. Xiang Li, Kaixuan Huang, Wenhao Yang, Shusen Wang, and Zhihua Zhang. On the convergence of fedavg on non-iid data. In 

International Conference on Learning Representations , 2020b. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=HJxNAnVtDS .Eugene Litvinov, Tongxin Zheng, Gary Rosenwald, and Payman Shamsollahi. Marginal loss modeling in lmp calculation. IEEE transactions on Power Systems , 19(2):880–888, 2004. Heyuan Liu and Paul Grigas. Risk bounds and calibration for a smart predict-then-optimize method. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 34:22083–22094, 2021. Jayanta Mandi, Peter J Stuckey, Tias Guns, et al. Smart predict-and-optimize for hard combinatorial optimization problems. In 

Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence , volume 34, pages 1603–1610, 2020. Jayanta Mandi, James Kotary, Senne Berden, Maxime Mulamba, Victor Bucarey, Tias Guns, and Ferdinando Fioretto. Decision-focused learning: Foundations, state of the art, benchmark and future opportunities. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research , 80:1623–1701, 2024. Brendan McMahan, Eider Moore, Daniel Ramage, Seth Hampson, and Blaise Aguera y Arcas. Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized data. In Artificial intelligence and statistics , pages 1273–1282. PMLR, 2017. Velibor V Miˇ si´ c and Georgia Perakis. Data analytics in operations management: A review. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management , 22(1):158–169, 2020. North American Electric Reliability Corporation. CIP-011-4 – Cyber Security – Information Protection, 2019. URL https: //www.nerc.com/pa/Stand/ReliabilityStandards/CIP-011-4.pdf .Avik Pal. Lux: Explicit parameterization of deep neural networks in julia. Zenodo , 2023. PJM Interconnection, L.L.C. Real-time hourly locational marginal pricing (lmp) data. https://www.energyonline.com/ , 2025. Accessed via EnergyOnline. Data from Jan 1–Dec 31, 2025. Accessed: 2026-02-14. Marin Vlastelica Poganˇ ci´ c, Anselm Paulus, Vit Musil, Georg Martius, and Michal Rolinek. Differentiation of blackbox combinatorial solvers. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2019. Evgenii Sergeevich Polovinkin. Strongly convex analysis. Sbornik: Mathematics , 187(2):259, 1996. Meng Qi and Zuo-Jun Shen. Integrating prediction/estimation and optimization with applications in operations management. In 

Tutorials in Operations Research: Emerging and Impactful Topics in Operations , pages 36–58. INFORMS, 2022. Meng Qi, Paul Grigas, and Zuo-Jun Shen. Integrated conditional estimation-optimization. Operations Research , 2025. 

22 DFFL Under Heterogeneity 

Utsav Sadana, Abhilash Chenreddy, Erick Delage, Alexandre Forel, Emma Frejinger, and Thibaut Vidal. A survey of contextual optimization methods for decision-making under uncertainty. European Journal of Operational Research , 320(2):271–289, 2025. Felix Sattler, Klaus-Robert M¨ uller, and Wojciech Samek. Clustered federated learning: Model-agnostic distributed multitask optimization under privacy constraints. IEEE transactions on neural networks and learning systems , 32(8):3710–3722, 2020. Rolf Schneider. Convex bodies: the Brunn–Minkowski theory , volume 151. Cambridge University Press, 2013. Shai Shalev-Shwartz. Online learning and online convex optimization. Foundations and Trends ® in Machine Learning , 4(2): 107–194, 2012. Shai Shalev-Shwartz and Shai Ben-David. Understanding machine learning: From theory to algorithms . Cambridge university press, 2014. Virginia Smith, Chao-Kai Chiang, Maziar Sanjabi, and Ameet S Talwalkar. Federated multi-task learning. Advances in neural information processing systems , 30, 2017. Sebastian U. Stich. Local SGD converges fast and communicates little. In International Conference on Learning Representations ,2019. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=S1g2JnRcFX .Lili Su, Jiaming Xu, and Pengkun Yang. A non-parametric view of fedavg and fedprox: Beyond stationary points. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 24(203):1–48, 2023. Bo Tang and Elias B. Khalil. Cave: A cone-aligned approach for fast predict-then-optimize with binary linear programs. In Bistra Dilkina, editor, Integration of Constraint Programming, Artificial Intelligence, and Operations Research , pages 193–210, Cham, 2024. Springer Nature Switzerland. ISBN 978-3-031-60599-4. Jianyu Wang, Qinghua Liu, Hao Liang, Gauri Joshi, and H Vincent Poor. Tackling the objective inconsistency problem in heterogeneous federated optimization. Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:7611–7623, 2020. Mang Ye, Xiuwen Fang, Bo Du, Pong C Yuen, and Dacheng Tao. Heterogeneous federated learning: State-of-the-art and research challenges. ACM Computing Surveys , 56(3):1–44, 2023. Liling Zhang, Xinyu Lei, Yichun Shi, Hongyu Huang, and Chao Chen. Federated learning with domain generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.10487 , 2021. Hankz Hankui Zhuo, Wenfeng Feng, Yufeng Lin, Qian Xu, and Qiang Yang. Federated deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.08277 , 2019. Patrick Zippenfenig. Open-meteo.com weather api, 2023. URL https://open-meteo.com/ .

A Implementation Details 

A.1 Synthetic Data-Generation Process 

Each synthetic instance is a pair (𝑥 𝑖 , 𝑐 𝑖 ) with features 𝑥 𝑖 ∈ R𝑝 and product-level costs 𝑐 𝑖 ∈ R𝑑 , with defaults 𝑝 = 8 and 

𝑑 = 50. For each run, the random seed is fixed. 

Feature generation. Features are sampled i.i.d. as 

𝑥 𝑖 ∼ N ( 0, 𝐼 𝑝 ), 𝑖 = 1, . . . , 𝑛. 

To couple features to product costs, we sample a binary loading matrix 𝐵 ∈ { 0, 1}𝑑 × 𝑝 once per dataset, with i.i.d. entries 𝐵 𝑘ℓ ∼ Bernoulli (0.5), similar to the generation method used by Liu and Grigas (2021). 

Cost generation. For product 𝑘 and sample 𝑖 we use a generating polynomial, 

𝑐 𝑘𝑖 =

h

1 +



1 + 𝐵 ⊤ 

> 𝑘

𝑥 𝑖 

√𝑝 

 𝜅 i

𝜉 𝑘𝑖 ,

23 DFFL Under Heterogeneity 

where 𝜅 controls nonlinearity and 𝜉 𝑘𝑖 is multiplicative noise: 

𝜉 𝑘𝑖 =

(1, 𝜖 = 0,

Uniform (1 − 𝜖, 1 + 𝜖 ), 𝜖 > 0.

Client assignment and data imbalance. Samples are randomly permuted and assigned to 20 clients. Two configu-rations are used to test heterogeneity through client sample sizes, as in (Su et al. 2023): 1. Balanced Data : 𝑛 = 2000, with equal allocation (100 samples/client). 2. Data-scarcity : 𝑛 = 5500, with strong imbalance: clients 1–10 receive 500 samples each and clients 11–20 receive 50 samples each. 

Client-specific parameters (heterogeneity controls). Beyond predictive data (𝑥 𝑖 , 𝑐 𝑖 ), each client receives optimiza-tion parameters controlling constraint heterogeneity, while objective heterogeneity is introduced through the predictive map. Specifically, if sample 𝑖 is assigned to client 𝑗 , the generating polynomial uses a client-specific loading matrix 

𝐵 ( 𝑗 ) = 𝐵𝑅 𝑗 ,

where 𝑅 𝑗 is an orthogonal rotation generated from a skew-symmetric Gaussian matrix and normalized so that |𝜂 obj |

controls the rotation magnitude. When 𝜂 obj = 0, 𝑅 𝑗 = 𝐼 𝑝 .

Portfolio Optimization. Constraint offsets are generated as 

ℎ 𝑗 = clip 

 log 𝑑 

2 + 𝜂 constr 𝜈 𝑗 , 10 −6, log 𝑑 − 10 −6



,

where 𝜈 𝑗 ∼ Unif (− 1, 1), and the stored scalar is 𝑟 𝑗 = −ℎ 𝑗 .

Fractional Knapsack. Shared base parameters (knapsack weights 𝛼 and their total bound 𝐵 ) are sampled once, 

𝑎 0 ∈ [ 0.5, 1.5]𝑑 , 𝐵 0 = 0.6𝑑. 

Client-level parameters are then, 

𝐵 𝑗 = 𝐵 0 exp (𝜂 constr 𝜁 𝑗 ), 𝜁 𝑗 ∼ N ( 0, 1).

Thus, 𝜂 obj scales heterogeneity in the mapping of covariates to cost vectors as before, and 𝜂 constr scales feasible set heterogeneity. We conduct the experiment for: 

𝜂 obj , 𝜂 constr ∈ { 0, 0.25 , 0.5, 1.0},

across 5 seeds, degrees 𝜅 ∈ { 2, 4, 6, 8}, and noise levels 𝜖 ∈ { 0, 1}.Evaluation uses an independent synthetic test set of 20,000 samples from the same data-generation law (the same seed, degree, noise, and 𝜂 obj controls) with balanced random assignment over 20 clients. The experiments were run on a Slurm cluster using a single CPU-only compute node. Each run allocated 40 CPU cores and 60 GB memory and executed for 20 hours wall-clock time, corresponding to 800 CPU core-hours (20 node-hours). 

A.2 Algorithm Modifications 

We adapt the FedAvg algorithm by McMahan et al. (2017) to accomodate DFL oracle solvers as a subroutine and the SPO+ gradient update. Specific changes made are shown in blue in Algorithms 1 and 2. 

24 DFFL Under Heterogeneity 

Algorithm 1 FedAvg-DFFL (this work) 

Require: Total clients 𝐾 ; rounds 𝑇 ; client fraction 𝐶 ; local epochs 𝐸 ; learning rate 𝜂 ; local optimizer Opt.  

> 1:

Initialize global parameters 𝑤 0 

> 2:

for 𝑡 = 0, 1, . . . , 𝑇 − 1 do  

> 3:

𝑚 ← max (⌊ 𝐶𝐾 ⌋, 1) [FedAvg] 4: 𝑆 𝑡 ← sample 𝑚 clients uniformly without replacement [FedAvg] 5: for all 𝑘 ∈ 𝑆 𝑡 in parallel do  

> 6:

𝑤 𝑡 +1 

> 𝑘

← ClientUpdateDFFL (𝑘, 𝑤 𝑡 ) [DFFL] 7: 𝑛 𝑘 ← |D 𝑘 | [FedAvg] 8: end for  

> 9:

𝑤 𝑡 +1 ← Í𝑘 ∈𝑆 𝑡      

> 𝑛 𝑘 Í𝑗 ∈𝑆𝑡 𝑛 𝑗

𝑤 𝑡 +1  

> 𝑘 [FedAvg] 10:

end for  

> 11:

return 𝑤 𝑇 

Algorithm 2 ClientUpdateDFFL (run on client 𝑘 )

Require: Global init 𝑤 ; client dataset D𝑘 ; client parameters; epochs 𝐸 ; optimizer Opt.  

> 1:

𝑤 ← 𝑤 init [FedAvg] 2: Initialize local optimizer state [FedAvg] 3: for 𝑖 = 1, 2, . . . , 𝐸 do [FedAvg] 4: for each training example (or minibatch) 𝑏 ⊂ D 𝑘 do  

> 5:

ˆ𝑦 ← 𝑓 𝑤 (𝑏 ) [FedAvg] 6: 𝑔 ← ∇ ˆ𝑦 LSPO + ( ˆ𝑦 ; 𝑏, client params ) [DFFL] 7: 𝑤 ← OptStep (𝑤, 𝑔 ) [DFFL] 8: end for  

> 9:

end for  

> 10:

return 𝑤 

A.3 Estimating the FG ratio 

For the FG ratio, we first define ˆ Δ 𝑗 = Í𝑚 𝑖 =1 𝛼 𝑖 E𝑥 ∼𝑃 𝑋 

H𝑖 𝑗 ( ˆ𝑐    

> ∥ˆ𝑐 ∥

𝐵 ), where E𝑥 ∼𝑃 𝑋 ˆ𝑐 is estimated by training a baseline federated model and averaging predictions across 200,000 test samples, and 𝐵 is the chosen upper bound on the model output’s ℓ2 norm. While we define the shape distance metric 𝛿 𝑁 in Theorem 1 and Corollary 1 we choose to use the Hausdorff distance 𝛿 as an approximation instead. In the strongly convex entropy-constrained portfolio case study, 

𝛿 = 𝛿 𝑁 due to the geometry of the problem. In the fractional knapsack 𝛿 𝑁 ≤ 𝛿 , so we slightly overestimate the empirical FG metrics. To estimate ˆ Δ and the statistical complexity terms from Remark 1, we have to first determine the metrics for the feasible sets, namely: Hausdorff distances 𝛿 and diameters 𝐷 𝑆 . Since exact calculation of the ℓ2 radius and diameter of feasible sets is a quadratic, non-convex task, we employ different techniques to compute for both the polyhedral and the strongly convex cases. We use a probability of 1 − 𝛿 = 0.95 in all cases. 

Strongly Convex Feasible Set. To determine the intersection points of the simplex constraint with the entropy constraint, we first show that the vectors there will be ”spikes”, meaning if dimension has value 𝑝 < 1, the other 𝑑 − 1dimensions will have equal values 𝑞 . This is obviously deduced through the KKT conditions. Through that, we can determine the value of 𝑝 each time through the entropy constraint Í𝑖 𝑥 𝑖 log 𝑥 𝑖 = 𝑟 and bisection. With one point, through symmetry, we can determine all extreme points of the feasible set, and therefore easily recover the radius, diameter, and Hausdorff distance. 

Polyhedral Feasible Set. Computing the Hausdorff distance between two polyhedral feasible sets is straightforward. Since in our experiments we only vary feasible sets by budget 𝑏 , we simply calculate 𝛿 = |𝑏 2 −𝑏 1 |∥ 𝑎 ∥ . For the radius, we employ a greedy algorithm to set 𝑥 𝑖 = 1 for 𝑖 with the lowest weight 𝑎 𝑖 until the total budget is met. Since we are 

25 DFFL Under Heterogeneity 

maximizing a convex function over a polytope, optimality is at a vertex, and therefore this is also the exact optimal solution. Unfortunately, the polyhedral feasible set does not have a tractable exact approach for the diameter. We therefore develop a heuristic approach. We first recognize that to maximize ∥𝑥 − 𝑤 ∥22 under the polytope, optimal vectors will prefer to alternate their values for each dimension. We therefore solve the problem as a binary two-bin bin-packing problem, where each bin has a maximum capacity equal to the polyhedral’s budget. As a last step, we add any remaining slack as different unused dimensions of the lowest available weight. We specifically employ a subset sum dynamic programming algorithm as the solver, since we can compute the subset sum table once for the generated weight vector and query budgets for each client’s feasible set, minimizing computational overhead (Caprara and Pferschy 2004, Kellerer et al. 2004). 

Empirical Rademacher Complexity. We estimate the vector-valued empirical Rademacher complexity by drawing i.i.d. Rademacher sign vectors 𝜎 𝑖 ∈ {± 1}50 and training a newly initialized network (using the same optimizer settings, gradient clipping, and output ℓ2-clipping ∥ 𝑓 (𝑥 )∥ ≤ 𝜏 ) to maximize 1

> 𝑛

Í𝑛 𝑖 =1 ⟨𝜎 𝑖 , 𝑓 (𝑥 𝑖 )⟩ , where 𝑛 is the different number of samples across the experiments. Averaging the best attained objective over 𝑇 = 20 draws yields bR𝑛 shown in Table 4 (reported with standard error). 

𝑛 bR𝑛 𝜎 bR𝑛 

50 96.032 0.43218 100 70.914 0.39193 500 32.825 0.18418 2000 16.578 0.08385 5500 10.015 0.06085 Table 4: Empirical Rademacher complexity results across different numbers of samples. While Rademacher complexity requires finding a global supremum over the hypothesis class, we attempt to mitigate that by aggregating over multiple draws and defining the class as the final model to be used. Nevertheless, we acknowledge that this is a heuristic (lower-bound) approximation of the true Rademacher complexity. Config 000 001 002 003 010 011 012 013 020 021 022 023 030 031 032 033 100 101 102 103 110 111 112 113 120 121 122 123 130 131 132 133 FG Ratio 246810 

> Knapsack Portfolio FG Ratio = 1.0

Figure 6: FG Ratios for both the polyhedral and strongly convex synthetic experiments. FG Ratio = 1 is marked with a red line, with ∼ 2.5% of clients being below the threshold. In the x-axis, the three-digit config code corresponds to the specific experiment. The first digit signifies whether there is (1) or is no (0) data imbalance. The second digit corresponds to objective heterogeneity (0-3) and the third constraint heterogeneity. Finally, we construct the FG ratio as in Remark 1 and showcase the results in Fig. 6. As we can see in the figure, the empirical FG ratio does not differentiate strongly between the polyhedral case and the strongly convex case, as opposed 

26 DFFL Under Heterogeneity 

to the results in Figs. 2a and 2b. The greatest discrepancy is shown in objective heterogeneity, where the knapsack performance deteriorates while the portfolio performance is largely unaffected (which agrees with the empirical results). In fact, according to the FG Ratio, in approximately 95% of cases clients should benefit from federating. While this is the case in the experiments with low objective heterogeneity (see Fig. 3) and balanced data, it does not necessarily hold for all experiments. Therefore, the FG Ratio can accurately capture the projected benefits of federating for clients with strongly convex feasible sets, especially with balanced datasets across clients, and only serve as a guide for the clients with polyhedral downstream feasible sets. We also provide the constituent empirical metrics we computed for the FG ratio in Table 5, to provide a sense of scale of each element, and how it changes with a higher degree of noise and a harder prediction task through the noise and degree metrics we describe in Section A.1. Table 5: Experimental Results (mean ± 95% CI) for the constituent metrics of the Federated Gain Ratio across 4 experimental configurations. 

Degree = 2 Degree = 4 Metric Noise = 0 Noise = 1 Noise = 0 Noise = 1 FG Ratio 3.421 ± 0.102 2.949 ± 0.083 2.549 ± 0.085 1.824 ± 0.048 Local Complexity 1530 .5 ± 73 .60 1530 .5 ± 73 .60 1530 .5 ± 73 .60 1530 .5 ± 73 .60 Federated Complexity 313 .0 ± 13 .80 313 .0 ± 13 .80 313 .0 ± 13 .80 313 .0 ± 13 .80 Heterogeneity term Δ 𝑗 312 .1 ± 24 .67 408 .4 ± 31 .91 654 .1 ± 56 .62 891 .1 ± 68 .49 Diameters 𝐷 𝑗 3.866 ± 0.163 3.866 ± 0.163 3.866 ± 0.163 3.866 ± 0.163 

∥𝑐 ∥ 20 .28 ± 0.010 23 .61 ± 0.020 87 .75 ± 0.150 101 .9 ± 0.301 

∥𝑐 − 2 ˆ 𝑐 ∥ 27 .36 ± 0.246 51 .71 ± 0.380 81 .61 ± 0.289 106 .9 ± 0.385 Hausdorff distances 𝛿 1.913 ± 0.242 1.913 ± 0.242 1.913 ± 0.242 1.913 ± 0.242 

∥𝑐 (𝑖 ) − 𝑐 ( 𝑗 ) ∥ 3.807 ± 0.171 16 .57 ± 0.056 31 .36 ± 1.384 78 .26 ± 0.662 Heterogeneity term 𝐴 209 .8 ± 14 .02 210 .2 ± 14 .00 209 .9 ± 14 .02 210 .3 ± 14 .00 Heterogeneity term 𝑇 102 .3 ± 11 .28 198 .2 ± 18 .47 444 .1 ± 43 .52 680 .9 ± 54 .98 

B Proofs 

Proof. Proof of Lemma 1. See (Schneider 2013). Fix 𝑢 . For any 𝑤 ∈ 𝑆 1 there exists ˜ 𝑤 ∈ 𝑆 2 with ∥𝑤 − ˜𝑤 ∥ ≤ 𝛿 . Then 

𝑢 ⊤𝑤 ≤ 𝑢 ⊤ ˜𝑤 + ∥ 𝑢 ∥∥ 𝑤 − ˜𝑤 ∥ ≤ 𝜉 𝑆 2 (𝑢 ) + ∥ 𝑢 ∥𝛿 . Taking max 𝑤 ∈𝑆 1 gives 𝜉 𝑆 1 (𝑢 ) ≤ 𝜉 𝑆 2 (𝑢 ) + ∥ 𝑢 ∥𝛿 . Repeat with (𝑆 1, 𝑆 2)

swapped. 

Proof. Proof of Lemma 2. Note 𝑧 ★𝑆 (𝑐 ) = −𝜉 𝑆 (− 𝑐 ) and apply Lemma 1. 

Proof. Proof of Lemma 3. Let 𝑆 ′ = 𝑆 + 𝑣, 𝑣 ∈ R𝑑 , the translated set. The SPO+ loss is made up of three terms, which we can observe under set translation: 

• Optimizer shifts: 𝑤 ★𝑆 ′ = 𝑤 ★𝑆 + 𝑣 (Boyd and Vandenberghe 2004). 

• Optimal value shifts: 𝑧 ★𝑆 ′ (𝑐 ) = 𝑧 ★𝑆 (𝑐 ) + 𝑐 𝑇 𝑣. 

• The max term shifts similarly: max 𝑤 ∈𝑆 ′ (𝑐 − 2 ˆ 𝑐 )𝑇 𝑤 = max 𝑤 ∈𝑆 (𝑐 − 2 ˆ 𝑐 )𝑇 𝑤 + ( 𝑐 − 2 ˆ 𝑐 )𝑇 𝑣. 

Substituting the terms into ℓ𝑆 +𝑣 ( ˆ𝑐, 𝑐 ) and collecting the ”shift” terms gives us the claim. 

Proof. Proof of Lemma 4. Write 

𝜉 𝑆 (𝑐 1 − 2 ˆ 𝑐 ) − 𝜉 𝑆 (𝑐 2 − 2 ˆ 𝑐 ) ≤ max   

> 𝑤 ∈𝑆

(𝑐 1 − 𝑐 2)⊤𝑤, 

27 DFFL Under Heterogeneity 

and 

−𝑧 ★𝑆 (𝑐 1) + 𝑧 ★𝑆 (𝑐 2) ≤ max  

> 𝑣 ∈𝑆

(𝑐 2 − 𝑐 1)⊤𝑣. 

Adding and taking maxima yields 



𝜉 𝑆 (𝑐 1 − 2 ˆ 𝑐 ) − 𝜉 𝑆 (𝑐 2 − 2 ˆ 𝑐 )



+



− 𝑧 ★𝑆 (𝑐 1) + 𝑧 ★𝑆 (𝑐 2)



≤ max  

> 𝑤,𝑣 ∈𝑆

(𝑐 1 − 𝑐 2)⊤ (𝑤 − 𝑣 ) ≤ ∥ 𝑐 1 − 𝑐 2 ∥ 𝐷 (𝑆 ).

Swap (𝑐 1, 𝑐 2) to get the absolute value bound. 

Proof. Proof of Lemma 5. Let 𝛿 = 𝑑 𝐻 (𝑆 1, 𝑆 2). Choose ˜ 𝑤 2 ∈ 𝑆 2 such that ∥𝑤 1 − ˜𝑤 2 ∥ ≤ 𝛿 . Then 

| ˆ𝑐 ⊤𝑤 1 − ˆ𝑐 ⊤𝑤 2 | ≤ | ˆ𝑐 ⊤ (𝑤 1 − ˜𝑤 2)| + | ˆ𝑐 ⊤ ( ˜𝑤 2 − 𝑤 2)| ≤ ∥ ˆ𝑐 ∥∥ 𝑤 1 − ˜𝑤 2 ∥ + ∥ ˆ𝑐 ∥∥ ˜𝑤 2 − 𝑤 2 ∥≤ ∥ ˆ𝑐 ∥( 𝛿 + 𝐷 (𝑆 2)) .

By symmetry we also have the bound ∥ ˆ𝑐 ∥( 𝛿 + 𝐷 (𝑆 1)) , taking the minimum completes the bound. 

Proof. Proof of Theorem 1 Using (2), 

ℓ𝑆 ( ˆ𝑐, 𝑐 ) =  𝜉 𝑆 (𝑐 − 2 ˆ 𝑐 ) − 𝑧 ★𝑆 (𝑐 ) + 2 ˆ 𝑐 ⊤𝑤 ★𝑆 (𝑐 ).

Hence, 

ℓ𝑆 ref ( ˆ𝑐, 𝑐 ref ) − ℓ𝑆 cl ( ˆ𝑐, 𝑐 cl ) ≤ 𝑇 + 𝐵, 

where 

𝑇 :=  𝜉 𝑆 ref (𝑐 ref − 2 ˆ 𝑐 ) − 𝑧 ★𝑆 ref (𝑐 ref )

−  𝜉 𝑆 cl (𝑐 cl − 2 ˆ 𝑐 ) − 𝑧 ★𝑆 cl (𝑐 cl ) ,𝐵 := 2 ˆ𝑐 ⊤ (𝑤 ★𝑆 ref (𝑐 ref ) − 𝑤 ★𝑆 cl (𝑐 cl )) .

Step 1 (bound 𝑇 by diameter + Hausdorff). Add and subtract 𝜉 𝑆 ref (𝑐 cl − 2 ˆ 𝑐 ) − 𝑧 ★𝑆 ref (𝑐 cl ):

𝑇 ≤  𝜉 𝑆 ref (𝑐 ref −2 ˆ 𝑐 ) − 𝑧 ★𝑆 ref (𝑐 ref ) −  𝜉 𝑆 ref (𝑐 cl −2 ˆ 𝑐 ) − 𝑧 ★𝑆 ref (𝑐 cl ) +  𝜉 𝑆 ref (𝑐 cl −2 ˆ 𝑐 ) − 𝑧 ★𝑆 ref (𝑐 cl ) −  𝜉 𝑆 cl (𝑐 cl −2 ˆ 𝑐 ) − 𝑧 ★𝑆 cl (𝑐 cl ) .

(10) The first term is bounded by Lemma 4: 

≤ 𝐷 ref ∥𝑐 ref − 𝑐 cl ∥ = 𝐷 ref 𝑐 𝑑 .

For the second term, use Lemma 1 on the support term, Lemma 2 on the value term, and Lemma 3 on the Hausdorff distance 𝛿 :

≤ 𝛿 𝑁 ∥𝑐 cl − 2 ˆ 𝑐 ∥ + 𝛿 𝑁 ∥𝑐 cl ∥.

So 

𝑇 ≤ 𝐷 ref 𝑐 𝑑 + 𝛿 𝑁 

 ∥𝑐 cl − 2 ˆ 𝑐 ∥ + ∥ 𝑐 cl ∥.

Swapping the roles of ref/cl yields 

𝑇 ≤ 𝐷 cl 𝑐 𝑑 + 𝛿 𝑁 

 ∥𝑐 ref − 2 ˆ 𝑐 ∥ + ∥ 𝑐 ref ∥,

so we may take the minimum of the two bounds. 

Step 2 (bound 𝐵 ). Because 𝑤 ★𝑆 ref (𝑐 ref ) ∈ 𝑆 ref and 𝑤 ★𝑆 cl (𝑐 cl ) ∈ 𝑆 cl , Lemma 5 yields 

𝐵 ≤ 2∥ ˆ𝑐 ∥( 𝛿 𝑁 + 𝐷 min ).

28 DFFL Under Heterogeneity 

Combining the bounds on 𝑇 and 𝐵 gives the claim. 

Proof. Proof of Lemma 6 Under 𝜌 -strong convexity ((Polovinkin 1996), Corollary 4), the support function 𝜉 𝑆 (·) is differentiable on R𝑑 \ { 0} and its gradient is 𝜌 -Lipschitz on the unit sphere. Moreover, ∇𝜉 𝑆 ( 𝑝 ) = 𝑥 𝑆 ( 𝑝 ). This yields the stated inequality. The second claim follows from 𝑤 ★𝑆 (𝑐 ) = 𝑥 𝑆 (𝑐 /∥ 𝑐 ∥) for 𝑐 ≠ 0. 

Proof. Proof of Lemma 7 ((Polovinkin 1996), Corollary 4) This is a standard consequence of the supporting-ball characterization of 𝜌 -strong convexity: the supporting ball at direction 𝑝 yields the inequality ∥𝑥 − 𝑥 𝑆 ( 𝑝 )∥ 2 + 2𝜌 (𝑥 −

𝑥 𝑆 ( 𝑝 )) ⊤ 𝑝 ≤ 0 for all 𝑥 ∈ 𝑆 .

Proof. Proof of Lemma 8 Fix 𝑝 ∈ R𝑑 , ∥ 𝑝 ∥ = 1, and let 𝑥 1 := 𝑥 𝑆 1 ( 𝑝 ), 𝑥 2 := 𝑥 𝑆 2 ( 𝑝 ), where 𝑥 𝑆 := arg max 𝑥 ∈𝑆 𝑝 𝑇 𝑥 , and 

𝑝 𝑇 𝑥 𝑆 = 𝜉 𝑆 ( 𝑝 ). By the definition of Hausdorff distance, there exists 𝑦 ∈ 𝑆 2 with ∥𝑦 − 𝑥 1 ∥ ≤ 𝛿 , hence 𝑝 ⊤ 𝑦 ≥ 𝑝 ⊤𝑥 1 − 𝛿 

by Cauchy-Schwarz inequality. By Lemma 1 we have |𝜉 𝑆 2 ( 𝑝 ) − 𝜉 𝑆 1 ( 𝑝 )| ≤ 𝛿 , so 𝜉 𝑆 2 ( 𝑝 ) ≤ 𝑝 ⊤𝑥 1 + 𝛿 . Combining yields 𝜉 𝑆 2 ( 𝑝 ) − 𝑝 ⊤ 𝑦 ≤ 2𝛿 .Applying Lemma 7 to 𝑆 2 gives 12𝜌 2 ∥𝑦 − 𝑥 2 ∥2 ≤ 2𝛿 , hence ∥𝑦 − 𝑥 2 ∥ ≤ 2√𝜌 2𝛿 . Therefore, 

∥𝑥 1 − 𝑥 2 ∥ ≤ ∥ 𝑥 1 − 𝑦 ∥ + ∥ 𝑦 − 𝑥 2 ∥ ≤ 𝛿 + 2√︁ 𝜌 2𝛿. 

Swapping the roles of 𝑆 1, 𝑆 2 yields ∥𝑥 1 − 𝑥 2 ∥ ≤ 𝛿 + 2√𝜌 1𝛿 . Taking the minimum provides the claim. 

Proof. Proof of Lemma 9 By the triangle inequality, 

∥𝑤 ★𝑆 ref (𝑐 ref ) − 𝑤 ★𝑆 cl (𝑐 cl )∥ ≤ ∥ 𝑤 ★𝑆 ref (𝑐 ref ) − 𝑤 ★𝑆 ref (𝑐 cl )∥ + ∥ 𝑤 ★𝑆 ref (𝑐 cl ) − 𝑤 ★𝑆 cl (𝑐 cl )∥ .

The first term is bounded by Lemma 6 (directional stability on 𝑆 ref ), giving ≤ 𝜌 ref ∥ 𝑝 (𝑐 ref ) − 𝑝 (𝑐 cl )∥ . The second term is bounded by Lemma 8 at direction 𝑝 (𝑐 cl ), giving ≤ 𝛿 + 2√𝜌 min 𝛿 . Therefore, the RHS yields ≤ 𝜌 ref ∥ 𝑝 (𝑐 ref ) − 

𝑝 (𝑐 cl )∥ + 𝛿 + 2√𝜌 min 𝛿. 

Similarly, by triangle inequality, 

∥𝑤 ★𝑆 ref (𝑐 ref ) − 𝑤 ★𝑆 cl (𝑐 cl )∥ ≤ ∥ 𝑤 ★𝑆 ref (𝑐 ref ) − 𝑤 ★𝑆 cl (𝑐 ref )∥ + ∥ 𝑤 ★𝑆 cl (𝑐 ref ) − 𝑤 ★𝑆 cl (𝑐 cl )∥ ,

where here the first term is bounded by Lemma 8 and the second by Lemma 6, and the RHS yields ≤ 𝜌 cl ∥ 𝑝 (𝑐 ref ) − 

𝑝 (𝑐 cl )∥ + 𝛿 + 2√𝜌 min 𝛿. 

Taking the minimum of the two resulting bounds, since 𝛿 + 2√𝜌 min 𝛿 is the same across both inequalities, gives us, 

∥𝑤 ★𝑆 ref (𝑐 ref ) − 𝑤 ★𝑆 cl (𝑐 cl )∥ ≤ 𝜌 min ∥ 𝑝 (𝑐 ref ) − 𝑝 (𝑐 cl )∥ + 𝛿 + 2√︁ 𝜌 min 𝛿. 

Proof. Proof of Lemma 10 By Lemma 11, the SPO+ loss is (2𝐷 𝑆 )-Lipschitz in the prediction argument. The result follows from the vector contraction inequality for the Rademacher complexity and standard concentration (Liu and Grigas 2021). 

Proof. Proof of Theorem 2 Step 1 (Local ERM bound). Apply Lemma 10 to client 𝑗 with confidence 𝛿 /2. For client 

𝑗 , with probability ≥ 1 − 𝛿 /2, sup 

> 𝑔 ∈ H

𝑅 𝑗 (𝑔 ) − b𝑅 𝑗 (𝑔 ) ≤ 𝜀 𝑗 (𝑛 𝑗 , 𝛿 /2).

The standard ERM argument gives: 

𝑅 𝑗 ( ˆ𝑔 loc  

> 𝑗

) ≤ b𝑅 𝑗 ( ˆ𝑔 loc  

> 𝑗

) + 𝜀 𝑗 

29 DFFL Under Heterogeneity 

≤ b𝑅 𝑗 (𝑔 ★𝑗 ) + 𝜀 𝑗 (by optimality of ˆ 𝑔 loc  

> 𝑗

)

≤ 𝑅 𝑗 (𝑔 ★𝑗 ) + 2𝜀 𝑗 .

Step 2 (Federated ERM bound on mixture risk). Apply Lemma 10 to the mixture distribution with sample size 𝑁 

and confidence 𝛿 /2. With probability ≥ 1 − 𝛿 /2, sup 

> 𝑔 ∈ H

𝑅 mix (𝑔 ) − b𝑅 mix (𝑔 ) ≤ 𝜀 mix (𝑁, 𝛿 /2).

By the same ERM argument: 

𝑅 mix ( ˆ𝑔 fed ) ≤ 𝑅 mix (𝑔 ★

> mix

) + 2𝜀 mix .

Step 3 (Relating client risk to mixture risk). By Equation 5, 

𝑅 𝑗 (𝑔 ) ≤ 𝑅 mix (𝑔 ) + Δ 𝑗 , 𝑅 mix (𝑔 ) ≤ 𝑅 𝑗 (𝑔 ) + Δ 𝑗 

for all 𝑔 ∈ H . Therefore: 

𝑅 𝑗 ( ˆ𝑔 fed ) ≤ 𝑅 mix ( ˆ𝑔 fed ) + Δ 𝑗 

≤ 𝑅 mix (𝑔 ★

> mix

) + 2𝜀 mix + Δ 𝑗 

≤ 𝑅 mix (𝑔 ★𝑗 ) + 2𝜀 mix + Δ 𝑗 

≤ 𝑅 𝑗 (𝑔 ★𝑗 ) + 2𝜀 mix + 2Δ 𝑗 ,

by optimality of 𝑔 ★

> mix

, which completes the proof. 

Proof. Proof of Proposition 1 For any 𝑔 ∈ H , using the shared-prediction specialization of Theorem 1 (setting ˆ 𝑐 = 𝑔 (𝑥 )

eliminates the Lipschitz prediction-shift terms), 

ℓ𝑆 𝑖 (𝑔 (𝑥 ), 𝑐 (𝑖 ) ) − ℓ𝑆 𝑗 (𝑔 (𝑥 ), 𝑐 ( 𝑗 ) ) ≤ H 𝑖 𝑗 (𝑔 (𝑥 )) .

Taking expectations and using the definition of 𝑅 mix ,

𝑅 𝑗 (𝑔 ) − 𝑅 mix (𝑔 ) =

> 𝑚

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1

𝛼 𝑖 

 𝑅 𝑗 (𝑔 ) − 𝑅 𝑖 (𝑔 ) ≤

> 𝑚

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1

𝛼 𝑖 EH𝑖 𝑗 (𝑔 (𝑥 ))  .

Taking the supremum over 𝑔 ∈ H yields the result. 

Proof. Proof of Lemma 11 For fixed 𝑐 , the function ˆ 𝑐 ↦ → ℓ𝑆  

> SPO +

( ˆ𝑐, 𝑐 ) is convex but generally non-smooth. A valid subgradient at ˆ 𝑐 is 

𝑔 ( ˆ𝑐 ; 𝑐 ) = 2 𝑤 ★𝑆 (𝑐 ) − 𝑤 ★𝑆 (2 ˆ 𝑐 − 𝑐 ),

where 𝑤 ★𝑆 (𝑢 ) ∈ arg min 𝑤 ∈𝑆 𝑢 ⊤𝑤 denotes an optimal solution of the downstream problem under objective 𝑢 (choose any selector if non-unique) (Elmachtoub and Grigas 2022). Since both 𝑤 ★𝑆 (𝑐 ) and 𝑤 ★𝑆 (2 ˆ 𝑐 − 𝑐 ) lie in 𝑆 , we have 

∥𝑔 ( ˆ𝑐 ; 𝑐 )∥ = 2∥𝑤 ★𝑆 (𝑐 ) − 𝑤 ★𝑆 (2 ˆ 𝑐 − 𝑐 )∥ ≤ 2𝐷 𝑆 .

A convex function whose subgradients are norm bounded by 𝐿 is 𝐿 -Lipschitz in the dual norm, hence the claim follows with 𝐿 = 2𝐷 𝑆 (Lemma 2.6, (Shalev-Shwartz 2012)). 

Proof. Proof of Corollary 2 The first inequality follows from Lemma 11 and Jensen’s inequality. The second uses Cauchy–Schwarz. The gain relationship follows by taking ratios of the local and federated bounds. 

30 DFFL Under Heterogeneity 

C Additional Results 

Proposition 2 (Strongly convex set calibration) . Let 𝐷 𝑓 (𝑥, 𝑦 ) = 𝑓 (𝑥 ) − 𝑓 (𝑦 ) − ⟨∇ 𝑓 (𝑦 ), 𝑥 − 𝑦 ⟩ denote the Bregman divergence associated with a convex function 𝑓 . Under Assumption 4, for any hypothesis 𝑓 ∈ H and any client 𝑗 ,

𝑅 SPO + ( ˆ𝑓 ) − 𝑅 SPO + ( 𝑓 ★𝑗 ) ≤ 2

𝜌 MSE 𝑗 ( ˆ𝑓 ),

where 𝑓 ★𝑗 ∈ arg min 𝑓 ∈ H 𝑅 SPO + ( 𝑓 ).Proof. Proof of Proposition 2 The SPO+ loss can be represented as ℓSPO + ( ˆ𝑐, 𝑐 ) = 𝐷 𝜉 𝑆 

 𝑐 −2 ˆ 𝑐, −𝑐 . Under Assumption 4, the support function 𝜉 𝑆 is (1/𝜌 )-smooth, so by the descent lemma, 

𝐷 𝜉 𝑆 (𝑥, 𝑦 ) ≤ 12𝜌 ∥𝑥 − 𝑦 ∥2.

Substituting 𝑥 = 𝑐 − 2 ˆ 𝑐 , 𝑦 = −𝑐 yields ℓSPO + ( ˆ𝑐, 𝑐 ) ≤ 2 

> 𝜌

∥ ˆ𝑐 − 𝑐 ∥2. Taking expectations over (𝑋, 𝐶 ) as in Section 5, 

𝑅 SPO + ( 𝑓 ) ≤ 2

𝜌 MSE 𝑗 ( 𝑓 ).

Subtracting 𝑅 SPO + ( 𝑓 ★𝑗 ) from both sides and noting that the MSE term for 𝑓 ★𝑗 is non-negative gives the result. 

Remark 4 (Instantiation with Su et al.’s subspace model) . In the subspace model of (Su et al. 2023), the minimax estimation gain satisfies FG est  

> 𝑗

≥ 𝑐 1

𝜅 · (𝜎 2 𝑑 /𝑛 𝑗 ∧ 𝐵 2) + 𝐵 2 (1 − 𝑛 𝑗 /𝑑, 0)+

𝜎 2 𝑑 /𝑁 + Γ2 ,

where Γ captures cross-client heterogeneity (and where 𝑎 ∧ 𝑏 := min {𝑎, 𝑏 }.) Plugging into Corollary 2: FG SPO + 

> 𝑗, bound

≳√︂ 𝑐 1

𝜅 ·√︄ (𝜎 2 𝑑 /𝑛 𝑗 ∧ 𝐵 2) + 𝐵 2 (1 − 𝑛 𝑗 /𝑑, 0)+

𝜎 2 𝑑 /𝑁 + Γ2 .

C.1 Additional Figures 

In Figs. 7 and 9 (homogeneous data) and Figs. 8 and 10 (heterogeneous data), each slope line corresponds to one client, and their relative regret when going from a federated model (left) to a local model (right). If the line slopes upwards, it means the client prefers a federated model in that configuration. In Figs. 8 and 10 specifically, we also differentiate clients based on their data sample size; orange slope lines represent data scarce-clients, and blue slope lines represent data-rich clients. 

31 DFFL Under Heterogeneity Constraint Het.=0 Constraint Het.=0.25 Constraint Het.=0.5 Constraint Het.=1.0 Objective Het.=0 Objective Het.=0.25 Objective Het.=0.5 Objective Het.=1.0 Federated Local 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 Federated ↓: 100% Federated Local 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 Federated ↓: 100% Federated Local 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 Federated ↓: 100% Federated Local 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 Federated ↓: 100% Federated Local 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 Federated ↓: 100% Federated Local 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 Federated ↓: 100% Federated Local 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 Federated ↓: 95% Federated Local 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 Federated ↓: 100% Federated Local 0.6 0.8 1.0 Federated ↓: 70% Federated Local 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 Federated ↓: 70% Federated Local 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 Federated ↓: 65% Federated Local 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 Federated ↓: 70% Federated Local 123Federated ↓: 0% Federated Local 01234Federated ↓: 10% Federated Local 01234Federated ↓: 20% Federated Local 01234Federated ↓: 40% 

Figure 7: Local versus global regret per client in the homogeneous data paradigm for the fractional knapsack 

problem. 

32 DFFL Under Heterogeneity Constraint Het.=0 Constraint Het.=0.25 Constraint Het.=0.5 Constraint Het.=1.0 Objective Het.=0 Objective Het.=0.25 Objective Het.=0.5 Objective Het.=1.0 Federated Local 0.5 1.0 1.5 1-10: 100% 11-20: 100% Federated Local 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 1-10: 90% 11-20: 100% Federated Local 0121-10: 70% 11-20: 100% Federated Local 0121-10: 80% 11-20: 100% Federated Local 0.5 1.0 1.5 1-10: 90% 11-20: 100% Federated Local 0121-10: 60% 11-20: 100% Federated Local 0121-10: 50% 11-20: 100% Federated Local 0121-10: 50% 11-20: 100% Federated Local 0.5 1.0 1.5 1-10: 0% 11-20: 100% Federated Local 0121-10: 10% 11-20: 100% Federated Local 0121-10: 20% 11-20: 100% Federated Local 0121-10: 50% 11-20: 100% Federated Local 1231-10: 0% 11-20: 0% Federated Local 01234 1-10: 10% 11-20: 10% Federated Local 012341-10: 20% 11-20: 20% Federated Local 0241-10: 40% 11-20: 40% 

Figure 8: Local versus global regret per client in the heterogeneous data paradigm for the fractional knapsack 

problem for data-rich (blue) versus data-scarce clients (orange). 

33 DFFL Under Heterogeneity Constraint Het.=0 Constraint Het.=0.25 Constraint Het.=0.5 Constraint Het.=1.0 Objective Het.=0 Objective Het.=0.25 Objective Het.=0.5 Objective Het.=1.0 Federated Local 0.06 0.08 0.10 0.12 0.14 Federated ↓: 100% Federated Local 0.075 0.100 0.125 0.150 Federated ↓: 100% Federated Local 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 Federated ↓: 100% Federated Local 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 Federated ↓: 100% Federated Local 0.08 0.10 0.12 0.14 0.16 Federated ↓: 100% Federated Local 0.09 0.12 0.15 Federated ↓: 100% Federated Local 0.075 0.100 0.125 0.150 0.175 Federated ↓: 100% Federated Local 0.10 0.15 0.20 Federated ↓: 100% Federated Local 0.10 0.12 0.14 Federated ↓: 100% Federated Local 0.100 0.125 0.150 Federated ↓: 100% Federated Local 0.10 0.12 0.14 0.16 0.18 Federated ↓: 100% Federated Local 0.10 0.15 0.20 Federated ↓: 100% Federated Local 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30 Federated ↓: 0% Federated Local 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30 Federated ↓: 0% Federated Local 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30 Federated ↓: 5% Federated Local 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30 Federated ↓: 15% 

Figure 9: Local versus global regret per client in the homogeneous data paradigm for the entropy portfolio problem. 

34 DFFL Under Heterogeneity Constraint Het.=0 Constraint Het.=0.25 Constraint Het.=0.5 Constraint Het.=1.0 Objective Het.=0 Objective Het.=0.25 Objective Het.=0.5 Objective Het.=1.0 Federated Local 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 1-10: 100% 11-20: 100% Federated Local 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 1-10: 100% 11-20: 100% Federated Local 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 1-10: 100% 11-20: 100% Federated Local 0.1 0.2 0.3 1-10: 100% 11-20: 100% Federated Local 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 1-10: 100% 11-20: 100% Federated Local 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 1-10: 100% 11-20: 100% Federated Local 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 1-10: 100% 11-20: 100% Federated Local 0.1 0.2 0.3 1-10: 100% 11-20: 100% Federated Local 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 1-10: 30% 11-20: 100% Federated Local 0.10 0.15 0.20 1-10: 20% 11-20: 100% Federated Local 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 1-10: 20% 11-20: 100% Federated Local 0.1 0.2 0.3 1-10: 30% 11-20: 100% Federated Local 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 1-10: 0% 11-20: 0% Federated Local 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 1-10: 0% 11-20: 0% Federated Local 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 1-10: 0% 11-20: 0% Federated Local 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 1-10: 10% 11-20: 10% 

Figure 10: Local versus global regret per client in the heterogeneous data paradigm for the entropy portfolio problem for data-rich (blue) versus data-scarce clients (orange). 

35 DFFL Under Heterogeneity % Difference    

> −50510 FG Difference 250 500 750 1000 1250

AECO AEP APS ATSI BGE COMED DAY DEOK DOM DPL DUQ JCPL METED PECO PENELEC PEPCO PPL PSEG RECO 

Figure 11: FG Difference versus Real Regret Difference for clients 

36