Title: RAIN: Secure and Robust Aggregation under Shuffle Model of Differential Privacy

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.03108v1

Published Time: Wed, 04 Mar 2026 02:33:25 GMT

Number of Pages: 15

Markdown Content:
# RAIN: Secure and Robust Aggregation under Shuffle Model of Differential Privacy 

Yuhang Li ∗, Yajie Wang ∗, Xiangyun Tang †, Peng Jiang ∗, Yu-an Tan ∗, Liehuang Zhu ∗∗Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China Email: {yuhangl, wangyajie19, pengjiang, tan2008, liehuangz }@bit.edu.cn 

†Minzu University of China, Beijing, China Email: xiangyunt@muc.edu.cn 

Abstract —Secure aggregation is a foundational building block of privacy-preserving learning, yet achieving robustness under adversarial behavior remains challenging. Modern systems in-creasingly adopt the shuffle model of differential privacy (Shuffle-DP) to locally perturb client updates and globally anonymize them via shuffling for enhanced privacy protection. However, these perturbations and anonymization distort gradient geometry and remove identity linkage, leaving systems vulnerable to adversarial poisoning attacks. Moreover, the shuffler, typically a third party, can be compromised, undermining security against malicious adversaries. To address these challenges, we present Robust Aggregation in Noise (RAIN), a unified framework that reconciles privacy, robustness, and verifiability under Shuffle-DP. At its core, RAIN adopts sign-space aggregation to robustly measure update consistency and limit malicious influence under noise and anonymization. Specifically, we design two novel secret-shared protocols for shuffling and aggregation that operate di-rectly on additive shares and preserve Shuffle-DP’s tight privacy guarantee. In each round, the aggregated result is verified to ensure correct aggregation and detect any selective dropping, achieving malicious security with minimal overhead. Extensive experiments across comprehensive benchmarks show that RAIN maintains strong privacy guarantees under Shuffle-DP and re-mains robust to poisoning attacks with negligible degradation in accuracy and convergence. It further provides real-time integrity verification with complete tampering detection, while achieving up to 90× lower communication cost and 10× faster aggregation compared with prior work. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Distributed learning has emerged as a powerful paradigm for collaboratively training models across multiple data holders while keeping raw data local. Federated learning (FL) enables multiple clients to jointly train models by exchanging gradient or parameter updates with a central server instead of sharing raw data [1]. However, subsequent studies have shown that such updates can still leak sensitive information through gradient inversion [2] and membership inference attacks [3], and are vulnerable to poisoning by malicious clients [4]. Differential privacy (DP) [5] is widely adopted to mitigate such privacy leakage. Early approaches primarily employed DP in a centralized setting [6], which relies on a fully trusted server to aggregate updates and inject noise. In contrast, local differential privacy (LDP) [7] has been recognized as more suitable for decentralized or cross-device learning scenarios [8]. Although LDP eliminates the need for a trusted aggregator, 

Fig. 1. Effect of Shuffle-DP on aggregation robustness. Existing robust aggregation fails under Shuffle-DP: local noise distorts gradient geometry, anonymization removes identity continuity, and they are further vulnerable to tampering by the shuffler. RAIN preserves robustness under the same Shuffle-DP setting without relying on a trusted shuffler. 

its strict privacy guarantees often require large noise [9], significantly degrading model utility and slowing convergence. Motivated by the need for strong privacy with practical utility, the shuffle model of differential privacy (Shuffle-DP) [10] has been introduced and extended to distributed learning scenarios [11]. By combining local perturbation with shuffling-based anonymization, Shuffle-DP amplifies privacy guarantees while requiring substantially less noise than LDP. As a result, Shuffle-DP has emerged as a prominent framework for privacy-preserving federated learning. Nevertheless, incorporating Shuffle-DP into FL introduces new security gaps. Noise and anonymization can erase the signals that robust aggregation relies on, leaving Shuffle-DP pipelines vulnerable to adversarial manipulation. These gaps manifest along two dimensions. 

1) Shuffle-DP Breaks Robust Aggregation Assumptions. 

As shown in Fig. 1, conventional robust aggregation meth-ods fail to remain effective under the Shuffle-DP setting. These approaches can be broadly categorized into geometry-based and reputation-based paradigms [12]. Geometry-based schemes [13], [14], [15] detect and filter malicious updates by exploiting geometric consistency among client gradients, such as distance or directional similarity. Reputation-based schemes [16], [17], [18] rely on temporal consistency across 

> arXiv:2603.03108v1 [cs.CR] 3 Mar 2026

training rounds, maintaining per-client trust scores or historical reputations to weight future updates. However, these principles no longer hold once Shuffle-DP is applied. This phenomenon is consistently observed in our experimental evaluation under Shuffle-DP. Geometric relationships among client updates are distorted, and identity continuity is removed under Shuffle-DP. Consequently, trustworthy clients could no longer be distinguished by the server. Shuffle-DP breaks the assump-tions underlying both geometry-based and reputation-based aggregation strategies, rendering them unreliable in adversarial settings. 2) Untrusted Shuffler Can Tamper with Client Updates. 

Existing Shuffle-DP frameworks [19], [20] also exhibit fun-damental limitations in their threat modeling. Nearly all prior studies assume that the shuffler behaves faithfully permuting the perturbed gradients received from clients and forwarding them to the server for aggregation. This strong trust assump-tion simplifies the protocol design but introduces a critical blind spot: if the shuffler is compromised or colludes with the server, it can tamper with, discard, or selectively reorder client updates during the shuffle process. Crucially, existing Shuffle-DP designs provide no mechanism to verify the correctness of the shuffle itself. As a result, an untrusted shuffler can tamper with client updates without detection, undermining aggregation integrity and the privacy guarantees promised by Shuffle-DP. 

To address the breakdown of robust aggregation un-der Shuffle-DP, we present Robust Aggregation in Noise (RAIN).The key insight behind RAIN is that, while Shuffle-DP anonymization distorts gradient magnitudes and geome-try, the sign patterns of benign and malicious updates re-main statistically separable. RAIN leverages this property to perform robust aggregation in the sign space, replacing geometry-dependent similarity with identity-free trust scoring to bound malicious influence under noise and anonymization. In addition, RAIN employs a secure secret-shared shuffle and aggregation protocol that executes all operations over additive shares, preserving privacy amplification without relying on a trusted shuffler. It further incorporates a lightweight streaming integrity layer with message authentication codes (MACs) to detect selective-drop and tampering attacks in real time, thereby ensuring that all client updates are included exactly once and remain unmodified, achieving verifiable aggrega-tion integrity with minimal overhead. Taken together, these components form a unified Shuffle-DP framework that recon-ciles privacy preservation, robustness, and verifiable integrity. By operating on binary sign updates, RAIN further reduces communication cost, demonstrating that strong security and efficiency can coexist in federated learning. We implement and evaluate RAIN on representative bench-marks. Results show that RAIN consistently outperforms ex-isting Shuffle-DP frameworks across model utility, robustness, and communication efficiency dimensions. For model utility, RAIN achieves stronger convergence and better privacy–utility trade-offs. For example, under ε = 10 , RAIN attains 87.6% accuracy on MNIST compared with 80.6% for the state-of-the-art [21]. Regarding robustness, RAIN maintains over 80% accuracy even when the majority of clients are mali-cious, indicating strong resilience in malicious environments. Meanwhile, the integrity verification module achieves 100% tampering detection with negligible runtime overhead, while the secret-shared shuffle naturally yields up to 90 × lower communication cost and 10 × faster runtime compared with prior Shuffle-DP frameworks. We highlight our main contributions below:  

> •

We propose Robust Aggregation in Noise (RAIN), a sign-space aggregation mechanism, which quantifies up-dates consistency in a noise-resilient manner, bounding malicious influence even under anonymized and noisy updates.  

> •

Building upon this mechanism, We design two novel secret-shared protocols for shuffling and aggregation that operate directly on additive shares and preserve Shuffle-DP’s tight privacy guarantees, enabling robust aggrega-tion without relying on a trusted shuffler.  

> •

We design a lightweight MAC-based layer for real-time verification during shuffling and aggregation, detecting message dropping and tampering attacks with minimal overhead while maintaining DP guarantees.  

> •

We conduct extensive experiments on datasets including MNIST, Fashion-MNIST, and CIFAR-10, demonstrating that RAIN outperforms existing Shuffle-DP frameworks in privacy-utility trade-offs, robustness under adversarial settings, and communication efficiency. II. R ELATED WORK 

A. Privacy-Preserving Federated Learning 

While robust aggregation seeks to ensure reliability under malicious updates, privacy-preserving federated learning fo-cuses on protecting clients’ data from inference and exposure. A broad spectrum of privacy mechanisms has been developed to safeguard the information contained in gradient updates, among which differential privacy and secure multi-party com-putation (MPC) [22] are the most widely adopted. Early works applied central differential privacy (CDP) [6], where a trusted server perturbs the aggregated model updates before dissemination. Although CDP provides formal privacy guarantees, it assumes that the server behaves honestly, a strong assumption rarely satisfied in practice. To eliminate this trust assumption, local differential privacy [7] was proposed, letting each client add random noise to its local gradients before transmission. LDP guarantees client-level privacy even against an untrusted aggregator, but the heavy noise required under strict privacy budgets severely hurts model utility and slows convergence [23]. To alleviate this privacy–utility tension, recent work has adopted the shuffle model of differential privacy [10]. In Shuffle-DP, clients first locally perturb their updates and then submit them to a shuffler that randomly permutes and anonymizes messages before aggregation. This anonymiza-tion yields privacy amplification by shuffling, allowing the 2TABLE I POSITIONING RAIN A MONG EXISTING APPROACHES .                                      

> Proposed Works Privacy Mechanism Privacy Preservation Robust Aggregation Integrity Efficiency
> FedAvg [1] –✗✗✗✗
> FLguard [28] MPC ✓✓✗✗
> FLOD [29] MPC ✓⊗✗✗
> ELSA [30] MPC ✓⊗✓✓
> FLAME [15] SDP ⊗✓⊗✗
> Camel [21] MPC+SDP ✓✗✓⊗
> RAIN(Ours) MPC+SDP ✓✓✓✓
> ✓fully addressed, ⊗partially addressed, ✗not addressed.

same formal guarantee with substantially less noise than in LDP. Shuffle-DP has thus become an attractive paradigm for scalable privacy-preserving FL and inspired frameworks such as FLAME [24], and Camel [21], which integrate DP with lightweight encryption or secure aggregation to improve com-munication efficiency. However, these systems focus mainly on confidentiality, assuming benign clients and an honest shuffler, and therefore remain vulnerable to model-poisoning or integrity attacks. Complementary to DP-based mechanisms, secure compu-tation techniques such as MPC, homomorphic encryption (HE), and secure aggregation have been extensively studied to prevent raw gradient disclosure [25], [26]. These cryptographic protocols guarantee that the server learns only aggregated results but cannot access individual updates. Recent examples include FLOD and ELSA [27], which employ MPC for secure model aggregation under honest-but-curious assump-tions. While such schemes provide strong privacy guarantees, they typically incur high communication overhead and lack robustness to malicious manipulation within the encrypted domain. As summarized in Table I, existing privacy-preserving FL frameworks address privacy or robustness only in isolation. RAIN unifies the strengths of both MPC and Shuffle-DP, achieving strong model privacy, robust aggregation, and high system efficiency under adversarial conditions. It remains effective even with malicious servers and provides verifiable, privacy-preserving aggregation without compromising accu-racy or communication cost. 

B. Robust Aggregation in Federated Learning 

Federated learning is inherently vulnerable to poisoning and Byzantine attacks, where adversarial clients upload ma-nipulated updates to corrupt the global model [31]. Because the local training process is invisible to the server, malicious participants can craft arbitrary gradients to degrade accuracy or embed hidden behaviors [32]. These threats have motivated a large body of research on robust aggregation, which aims to maintain global model reliability even when a fraction of clients behave adversarially. Early defenses rely on geometric consistency among client updates. Methods such as Krum, Trimmed-Mean, and Me-dian [14] treat malicious updates as outliers in Euclidean or coordinate space and aggregate only the statistically central gradients [33]. While simple and effective under homogeneous data, these methods break down when benign updates become diverse or when privacy noise perturbs the geometric structure. Later, direction-aware approaches like FLTrust and FLAME exploit cosine similarity between client and reference models to detect anomalies, whereas FLARE and FLOD [29] project gradients into representation or sign space to improve re-silience. Despite their sophistication, these techniques remain geometry-based, presuming visible, comparable gradients and a trustworthy aggregation channel [34]. Complementary to geometric defenses, reputation-based ag-gregation builds temporal trust across training rounds. Fools-Gold penalizes clients that exhibit correlated update directions to mitigate Sybil attacks, while DnC [35] and CONTRA learn dynamic trust weights or contrastive embeddings to identify persistent malicious behavior. These schemes shift from per-round geometry to historical behavioral consistency, improving long-term robustness but still assuming stable, identifiable clients. Once gradients become anonymized or shuffled, as in privacy-preserving settings these assumptions collapsed, leaving reputation-based defenses ineffective. Recent advances attempt to bridge robustness with privacy and efficiency[36]. FLOD leverages Hamming-distance–based sign aggregation under multi-server MPC to tolerate over 50% Byzantine clients with encrypted updates, and FLARE utilizes feature-space detection for stealthy backdoors. However, these designs either impose high communication and computation costs or rely on partial trust assumptions, limiting scalability. Overall, existing robust aggregation schemes fundamentally rely on two forms of consistency—geometric alignment among visible gradients and temporal identity across training rounds. None remain effective once Shuffle-DP anonymization simul-taneously destroys gradient geometry and identity continuity, exposing a fundamental incompatibility between privacy and robustness. RAIN addresses this gap by operating directly in the sign space, where update consistency is measured through Ham-ming distance rather than geometric similarity. This geometry-free design preserves robustness even under strong perturba-tion and anonymity, while its secure two-server realization ensures verifiable aggregation without relying on a trusted shuffler. III. P RELIMINARIES 

A. Differential Privacy 

This section summarizes the basic definitions of differential privacy relevant to our setting. In the central model of DP, a trusted curator collects users’ data and applies a randomized mechanism before releasing any aggregate statistics. Formally, two datasets D = {d1, . . . , d n} and D′ = {d′

> 1

, . . . , d ′

> n

} drawn from the same domain X are said to be neighboring if they differ in only one record, i.e., there exists an index i such that 

di̸ = d′ 

> i

while dj = d′ 

> j

for all j̸ = i. A randomized mechanism 

M is differentially private if its outputs on neighboring datasets remain statistically close. 3Definition 1 (Central Differential Privacy ). A randomized mechanism M : X n → Y satisfies (ε, δ )-DP if, for all neighboring datasets D, D′ ∈ X n and every subset S ⊆ Y ,

Pr[ M(D) ∈ S] ≤ eε Pr[ M(D′) ∈ S] + δ. (1) In contrast, the local model removes the need for a trusted server by letting each user perturb its data locally before send-ing it for aggregation [37]. The following definition formalizes the local privacy guarantee. 

Definition 2 (Local Differential Privacy ). A mechanism R :

X → Y satisfies ε0-LDP if, for any two possible inputs d, d ′ ∈X and any subset S ⊆ Y ,

Pr[ R(d) ∈ S] ≤ eε0 Pr[ R(d′) ∈ S]. (2) While LDP eliminates the need for trust, achieving strict local privacy often requires large noise, which significantly harms model utility. 

Definition 3 (Shuffled Differential Privacy ). A protocol consisting of a local randomizer R, a shuffler S, and an an-alyzer A satisfies (ε, δ )-Shuffle-DP if the overall mechanism 

A ◦ S ◦ R n is (ε, δ )-differentially private in the central model. The shuffle model bridges the gap between the central and local models by introducing an anonymization step between local randomization and aggregation. In this model, each client first applies a local randomizer and then sends the perturbed output to a shuffler, which randomly permutes all messages before forwarding them to the analyzer. By breaking the linkage between users and their messages, shuffling enables significant privacy amplification compared to pure local DP. RAIN adopts the Gaussian mechanism as the local random-izer, where each client clips its gradient and adds Gaussian noise ηi ∼ N (0 , σ 2Id). When combined with shuffling, the resulting protocol satisfies (ε, δ )-Shuffle-DP with significantly amplified privacy compared to pure LDP, providing the formal basis for client-level privacy in our setting. 

B. Cryptographic Foundations 

Secure Two-Party Computation (2PC). RAIN relies on a lightweight two-server protocol based on additive secret sharing, which enables two non-colluding servers to jointly compute functions over private data without revealing indi-vidual inputs. 

Additive Secret Sharing. For a value x ∈ Zp, client 

Ci generates two random shares (x0, x 1) such that x =

x0 + x1 mod p. Server St (t ∈ { 0, 1}) holds share xt. Neither server can reconstruct x alone, but they can jointly perform secure additions and multiplications over the shares. 

Secure Multiplication via Beaver Triples. Given shared values ⟨a⟩A and ⟨b⟩A, the parties use a pre-generated Beaver triple (x, y, z ) satisfying z = xy to compute ab securely: 

⟨ab ⟩A 

> t

= −tef + f ⟨a⟩A 

> t

+ e⟨b⟩A 

> t

+ ⟨z⟩A 

> t

, (3) where e = a − x and f = b − y are reconstructed after local subtraction of shares. This primitive allows all subsequent arithmetic in RAIN—including Hamming-distance evaluation, ReLU-based weighting, and aggregation—to be executed en-tirely over secret shares. For efficiency, RAIN employs only arithmetic sharing over 

Zp; Boolean sharing and garbled circuits are omitted, as no bit-level logic is required in our design. IV. P ROBLEM STATEMENT 

A. System Model 

Figure 2 illustrates the federated learning setting consid-ered in this work. We assume a population of N clients 

C = {C1, . . . , C N } and two aggregation servers S0 and 

S1 that jointly provide a secure shuffling-and-aggregation service. Each client Ci holds a private dataset Di and, at round t, performs local training to obtain a gradient update 

gti = ∇L i(wt). To provide local randomization compatible with the shuffle model of DP, the client clips its update, adds Gaussian noise, and applies sign encoding, yielding a noisy binary vector gbool  

> i

.All noisy sign updates are transmitted to the two servers over secure channels. The servers execute a secure shuffling procedure that permutes the incoming updates to break linka-bility between clients and messages. After shuffling, they per-form integrity checks and run a privacy-preserving aggregation over the anonymized, noised updates. The global model is then updated as 

˜W = wt − η · AGGREGATE 

 {gbool  

> i

}, (4) where A GGREGATE (·) denotes an aggregation mechanism that operates under the above privacy constraints. Communication between clients and servers is protected using secure multi-party computation primitives, so that no single server can reconstruct any individual update or identify its origin. Certain robust aggregation mechanisms rely on a public reference signal to stabilize aggregation under anonymized and noisy updates. We assume access to a small, audited public calibration set R (size ≈ 10 2), drawn to match the task distribution and containing no client data. R is used only to compute a stable reference direction and never participates in training or privacy accounting. The set can be curated by a jointly trusted authority or sourced from public benchmarks; its small size makes auditing feasible. We treat the resulting reference direction as public and observable to adversaries. Even under this assumption, an adversary can only affect aggregation by flipping a bounded fraction of sign coordinates without exceeding the Hamming-distance threshold. This as-sumption is standard and does not weaken client-side Shuffle-DP guarantees. 

B. Threat Model and Assumptions 

We consider an adversary with both internal and external capabilities, targeting robustness, privacy, and integrity of the federated learning process. All parties are assumed to be com-putationally bounded and cannot break standard cryptographic primitives such as MPC, message authentication codes, or encryption. 4Fig. 2. Overview of the RAIN framework. Each client Ci locally adds DP noise and sign-encodes its update into a binary vector, then sends secret shares to two non-colluding servers S0 and S1. The servers execute a verifiable shuffle to anonymize message origins, perform MAC-based integrity checks to reject dropped or tampered messages, and compute Hamming-distance consistency over the shuffled sign vectors. RAIN then aggregates the verified updates in the arithmetic domain and reconstructs the global model ˜W.

Client-side adversary. The adversary may compromise an arbitrary, potentially majority, subset of clients and coordinate them to mount Byzantine attacks that bias the global model or degrade its accuracy. Compromised clients can arbitrarily manipulate local gradients before randomization and may at-tempt to infer information about benign clients from aggregate updates or model dynamics. 

Server-side adversary. We consider adversaries that may compromise the server-side infrastructure responsible for shuf-fling and aggregation. To model this setting, we adopt a non-colluding two-server architecture with two aggregation servers 

(S0, S 1), where at most one server may be malicious or semi-honest. A compromised server may deviate arbitrarily from the protocol execution, while the other remains honest. This non-collusion assumption is standard in privacy-preserving analytics (e.g., SecureFL [38], ELSA [27], FLOD [29]) and reflects practical cross-organizational deployments, such as a cloud provider cooperating with an independent auditor or two entities governed by distinct administrative domains. If both servers collude, privacy degrades to the local model, where protection reduces to standard LDP guarantees. V. T HE DESIGN OF RAIN 

A. Overview 

RAIN aims to enable secure and robust federated learn-ing under the Shuffle-DP model, where client-level privacy, Byzantine robustness, and verifiable aggregation integrity must be achieved simultaneously. Unlike prior Shuffle-DP frame-works that address privacy and robustness in isolation, RAIN unifies these objectives through a two-layer design: the RAIN mechanism, a sign-space robust aggregation rule, and the RAIN framework, its malicious-secure realization via a secure secret-shared shuffle and aggregation protocol with integrated integrity verification. The key challenge for achieving robustness under Shuffle-DP is that random permutation, while amplifying privacy, si-multaneously destroys the geometric consistency and temporal identity that conventional robust aggregation depends on. As a result, geometric-based and reputation-based defenses collapse under anonymization. To restore robustness without breaking anonymity, we propose Robust Aggregation in Noise, which aggregates in the sign domain instead of the Euclidean space. By exploiting the statistical separability between benign and adversarial sign vectors, RAIN replaces geometric similarity with Hamming-distance–based trust scoring, thus bounding the influence of malicious clients even when a majority of participants are adversarial. This RAIN mechanism provides the theoretical foundation of our framework. While sign-space aggregation enables robustness under noise and anonymity, implementing it securely under Shuffle-DP raises additional challenges in privacy. A naive approach would be to adopt verifiable mixnet-style shuffling or generic secure aggregation protocols. However, these methods rely on public-key operations and zero-knowledge proofs, resulting in prohibitive computational and communication cost when processing high-dimensional model updates in federated learn-ing. Moreover, mixnet-based verifiability assumes a trusted auditor or non-overlapping batches, which conflicts with the continuous aggregation requirement of FL. To overcome these limitations, the RAIN framework builds upon lightweight secret sharing and modular arithmetic to realize a two-server secret-shared shuffle and aggregation protocol. Two non-colluding servers jointly perform all shuffle and aggregation steps directly over additive shares of sign-encoded updates, without learning either the client identities or the shuffle permutation. This preserves Shuffle-DP privacy amplification while ensuring computational correctness even if one server is malicious or semi-honest. Beyond robustness and privacy, RAIN further guarantees verifiable integrity against selective-failure and tampering at-tacks from a malicious server. Prior MPC shuffle frameworks achieve verifiability through heavy cryptographic proofs or 5offline auditing, which are infeasible for real-time federated aggregation. We instead design a streaming integrity verifi-cation layer that attaches lightweight message authentication codes to each encrypted update and validates them online throughout the shuffle pipeline. This streaming design ensures that every client contribution is either correctly processed or detected as invalid in real time, without interrupting the MPC execution or violating DP semantics. Formally, we prove in Section V-D that our protocol achieves malicious-security against any single colluding server, ensuring that no message can be dropped, modified, or replayed without detection. 

B. Robust Aggregation in Noise 

Traditional robust aggregation schemes rely on the geo-metric or temporal consistency of client updates to identify and suppress malicious gradients. However, in the Shuffle-DP setting, the injected noise distorts geometric relations, and the shuffling process removes any persistent identity linkage. As a result, distance- or reputation-based aggregation rules fail to operate effectively. To overcome this limitation, we design RAIN, a geometry-free robust aggregation mechanism that operates directly in the sign space. Although noise perturbation and anonymization obscure gradient magnitudes and directions, the element-wise sign pattern of updates remains statistically distinguishable between benign and adversarial clients. Benign updates tend to produce sign vectors aligned with the true global direction, whereas poisoned or random updates exhibit significantly higher sign-flip ratios. Leveraging this property, RAIN aggregates in the sign domain using Hamming-distance–based trust scoring and ReLU-adaptive weighting, thereby bounding the influence of outliers without requiring client identities or raw geometric information. 

Local Randomization. To ensure client-level privacy com-patible with Shuffle-DP, we adopt the Sign-Gaussian mecha-nism [39], originally proposed in DP-RSA to jointly achieve differential privacy and Byzantine robustness. Each client applies the mechanism to its clipped gradient: 

˜bi = sign  clip( gi) + ηi

, ηi ∼ N (0 , σ 2Id), (5) which satisfies (ε, 0) -DP when σ > max i{ 2|gi| 

> 3

, 4∆ g 

> ε

}. This perturbation injects randomness primarily near the sign bound-ary, preserving most directional information while maintaining strict privacy under Shuffle-DP anonymization. Let gi denote a scalar component of the clipped gradient and ηi ∼ N (0 , σ 2) the added noise. The transmitted sign is 

˜bi = sign( gi + ηi). The probability that the noise flips the sign is 

Pflip = Pr[ ˜bi̸ = sign( gi)] = Φ 



− |gi|

σ



, (6) where Φ( ·) is the standard Gaussian CDF. Hence, larger |gi|

or smaller σ yields a lower flip probability. The expected transmitted sign satisfies 

E[˜bi | gi] = (2Φ( |gi|/σ ) − 1) sign( gi), (7) indicating that the noisy sign is an attenuated version of the true sign with factor κi = 2Φ( |gi|/σ ) − 1 ∈ [0 , 1] . Following the privacy analysis in [39], the mechanism satisfies (ε, 0) -DP when 

σ > max 

 2|gi|

3 , 4∆ g

ε



. (8) This reveals the intrinsic privacy–robustness trade-off: larger 

σ enhances privacy but increases sign-flip probability, while smaller σ improves robustness at the cost of weaker pri-vacy. As training converges and ∥gi∥ decreases, the effective noise impact naturally diminishes, maintaining a balanced privacy–utility trade-off. 

Algorithm 1: RAIN: Robust Aggregation in Noise                                      

> Input: Randomized sign vectors {˜bi}Ni=1 , reference direction
> r(from root dataset), MAD coefficient λmad
> Output: Aggregated update gagg
> for each client ido
> Compute di=12d(d−˜bi·r);Estimate τ= median( d) + cmad ·λmad ·MAD( d);Assign αi=max(0 , τ −di)P
> jmax(0 , τ −dj);Compute gagg =P
> iαi˜bi;
> return gagg ;

Aggregation Rule. Let ˜bi ∈ {− 1, +1 }d denote the ran-domized sign vector from client i. To anchor trust in an anonymized environment, RAIN adopts a reference direction 

r derived from a small trusted root dataset, which provides a stable and verifiable global orientation. The server (or secret-shared aggregator) computes the Hamming distance between each ˜bi and r:

di = 12d

 d − ˜bi · r. (9) A robust threshold τ is estimated via the median and MAD: 

τ = median( d) + cmad · λmad · MAD( d). (10) Here, cmad = 1 .4826 is the normal-consistency constant that scales the MAD to an unbiased estimate of the standard deviation under Gaussian assumptions. This normalization en-sures that λmad corresponds to the number of robust standard deviations from the median. Each client receives a ReLU-based trust weight: 

αi = max(0 , τ − di)

P 

> j

max(0 , τ − dj ) , (11) and the aggregated update is computed as 

gagg =

> N

X

> i=1

αi˜bi, ˜W = wt − η g agg . (12) The ReLU weighting acts as a smooth relaxation of binary trust filtering, assigning higher weights to clients whose sign vectors align with the reference direction and suppressing those deviating beyond the robust threshold. Unlike FLTrust, FLARE, or Krum, RAIN operates purely in the sign do-main, requiring neither gradient magnitudes nor persistent 6client identities. This makes RAIN inherently compatible with Shuffle-DP anonymization. Moreover, since Hamming dis-tance and ReLU can be expressed using addition and compari-son primitives, the entire aggregation can be securely executed within the MPC-encrypted domain without revealing individ-ual updates. The trusted root direction provides a consistent anchor, ensuring stability even under heavy anonymization and noise perturbation. 

Theoretical Guarantee. Following [39], we derive the following bound on RAIN’s privacy–robustness trade-off. 

Lemma 1 (Noise–Robustness Trade-off of RAIN) . Let gi be a scalar component of a clipped gradient with sensitivity ∆g ,and ˜bi = sign( gi + ηi) its privatized sign under the Sign-Gaussian mechanism, where ηi ∼ N (0 , σ 2). If σ > 4∆ g 

> ε

,the mechanism preserves (ε, 0) -DP. Moreover, when ε ≥ 2,the expected sign-flip probability Pflip = Φ( −| gi|/σ ) remains below 0.15 for typical gradients, and the aggregated direction in RAIN satisfies 

E[cos θ] ≥ 1 − 2Pflip > 0.7.

Hence, RAIN achieves both strict differential privacy and stable robust aggregation.This lemma analyzes the effect of Gaussian noise on sign stability and does not provide an additional privacy guarantee. Proof. From [39], the Sign-Gaussian mechanism guarantees 

(ε, 0) -DP if σ > 4∆ g /ε . The sign-flip probability satisfies 

Pflip = Φ( −| gi|/σ ) ≤ Φ( −| gi|ε/ (4∆ g )) . For normalized gradients |gi| ≥ 2∆ g , we have Pflip ≤ Φ( −ε/ 2) . Numerically, 

Φ( −1) ≈ 0.1587 and Φ( −1.5) ≈ 0.0668 , so when ε ≥ 2,

Pflip < 0.15 . Let pf = Pflip . Since each flipped sign re-verses one coordinate, the expected cosine similarity between RAIN’s aggregated direction and the true gradient satisfies 

E[cos θ] ≥ 1 − 2pf . For pf ≤ 0.15 , E[cos θ] ≥ 0.7, ensuring convergence consistency. Thus, for ε ≥ 2, RAIN attains strict 

(ε, 0) -DP while maintaining robust aggregation with negligible degradation. 

C. Secret-shared Shuffle and Aggregation 

While RAIN enables robust aggregation in the sign domain, it still requires a secure mechanism to shuffle and aggregate anonymized updates without revealing their correspondence to individual clients. In the Shuffle-DP paradigm, the shuffle operation itself provides privacy amplification, but realizing it securely in a multi-server environment is non-trivial: a curious or malicious server may attempt to infer the permutation, drop or modify messages, or bias the aggregated result. To address these issues, RAIN introduces a lightweight two-server secret-shared shuffle and aggregation protocol, which performs both anonymization and robust aggregation entirely within the encrypted domain. 

Secret Sharing Scheme. RAIN employs a two-party addi-tive secret-sharing scheme between two non-colluding servers, 

S0 and S1. Each client Ci splits its randomized sign vector 

bi ∈ {− 1, +1 }d into two additive shares (b(0)  

> i

, b (1)  

> i

) satisfying 

b(0)  

> i

+ b(1)  

> i

= bi (mod p), (13) 

Algorithm 2: MPC-based Encrypted Shuffle and Ag-gregation in RAIN 

Input: Clients’ additive shares {(b(0)  

> i

, b (1)  

> i

)}Ki=1 , where 

bi ∈ {− 1, +1 }d and b(0)  

> i

+b(1)  

> i

= bi mod p;Trusted direction share [strust ];robust threshold share [τ ].

Output: Aggregated next direction [snext ] ∈ {− 1, +1 }d.

Parameters: Two non-colluding servers S0, S 1; modulus p;PRG G; secure Add , Mul , Cmp .

Offline (preprocessing) (O1) S0 and S1 agree on a shared seed seed ; expand via PRG: (π0, π 1, {r0[i]}Ki=1 , {r1[i]}Ki=1 ) ← G(seed ),with r0[i] + r1[i] = 0 mod p.

(O2) Fix MPC primitives for vector Mul (scalar ×vector), 

Cmp (comparison), and batched reductions. 

Phase I: Secret-shared Shuffle for i ← 1 to K do 

S0: b′(1)  

> i

← π0(b(0)  

> i

) + r0[i]

S1: b′(2)  

> i

← π1(b(1)  

> i

) + r1[i]

Phase II: Secret-shared Robust Aggregation (A1) Secure Hamming distances for i ← 1 to K do for j ← 1 to d do if then 

[xor i,j ] ← [b′ 

> i,j

] + [ strust ,j ] − 2 · [b′ 

> i,j

] · [strust ,j ]

// x ⊕ y = x + y − 2xy over Zp

[hd i] ← Pdj=1 [xor i,j ]

(A2) Adaptive ReLU weights for i ← 1 to K do 

[mi] ← Cmp ([ τ ], [hd i]) [ wi] ← ([ τ ] − [hd i]) · [mi]

(A3) Weighted aggregation in shares 

[z] ← 0 ∈ Zdp

for i ← 1 to K do 

[z] ← [z] + [ wi] · [b′

> i

]

(A4) Sign extraction (coordinate-wise) for j ← 1 to d do 

[cj ] ← Cmp ([ zj ], 0) [ snext ,j ] ← 2 · [cj ] − 1

return [snext ].

and sends b(t) 

> i

to server St for t ∈ { 0, 1}. Neither server can reconstruct any bi individually. This setting eliminates the need for a central coordinator or pre-shared permutation (as in prior three-server schemes [21]), while maintaining the same privacy amplification guarantee as Shuffle-DP. 

Secret-shared Shuffle Protocol. We instantiate the en-crypted shuffle in RAIN using a lightweight two-party secret-shared protocol built on additive secret sharing. Unlike the three-server shuffle adopted by Camel [40], our design requires only two non-colluding servers, S0 and S1, which collabora-tively perform a secret permutation and re-masking of client updates in the encrypted domain. Each client i provides additive shares (b(0)  

> i

, b (1)  

> i

) such that 

b(0)  

> i

+ b(1)  

> i

= bi mod p. To securely shuffle the shared updates 

{[bi]}, the two servers jointly derive correlated randomness from a shared PRG seed. Specifically, S0 and S1 locally expand the seed to generate: 

π0, π 1 : [ N ] → [N ], r0, r 1 ∈ ZN ×dp , (14) 7where π0, π 1 are random local permutations and r0, r 1 are random re-masking vectors satisfying r0 + r1 = 0 (mod p).The secret-shared shuffle proceeds in two phases as follows. 

Offline Phase. The servers synchronize the random seeds used for permutation and re-masking via a com-mon setup channel, ensuring that the generated correlations 

(π0, π 1, r 0, r 1) are consistent but remain unknown to any third party. No client or external coordinator is required. 

Online Phase. During the shuffle, each server permutes and re-masks its local shares independently: 

S0 : b′ 

> i

= π0(b(0)  

> i

) + r0[i],S1 : b′ 

> i

= π1(b(1)  

> i

) + r1[i]. (15) Because r0 + r1 = 0 , the permuted shares satisfy: 

b′(0)  

> i

+ b′(1)  

> i

= bπ(i) mod p, (16) where π = π1 ◦ π0 is the effective joint permutation. Thus, the output [b′

> i

] corresponds to a randomly permuted and re-masked version of the input [bi], achieving both anonymity and correctness: 

[b′

> i

] ← SECRET -S HARED SHUFFLE π ([ bi]) . (17) Neither server learns the global permutation π nor any link between a client and its shuffled update, yet both can continue performing secure computation over the anonymized shares. This shuffle step provides the same privacy amplification as the Shuffle-DP model while preserving full compatibility with RAIN’s robust aggregation pipeline. 

Secret-shared Robust Aggregation. After the encrypted shuffle, the two servers jointly perform RAIN’s sign-space robust aggregation entirely over secret shares. For each anonymized client update [b′

> i

], the servers first compute the bitwise Hamming distance to the trusted reference direction 

[strust ] and then obtain an adaptive weight using a secure ReLU gate: 

[hd i] = 

> d

X

> j=1

 [b′ 

> i,j

] + [ strust ,j ] − 2 [ b′ 

> i,j

] [ strust ,j ],

[wi] =  [τ ] − [hd i] · 1[τ ]≥[hd i].

(18) These two steps are realized via the MPC-Hamming and MPC-ReLU subroutines, implemented using only additions, multiplications, and secure comparisons over Zp.Each weighted update is then aggregated in the encrypted domain through secure scalar–vector multiplication followed by coordinate-wise summation: 

[z] = 

> K

X

> i=1

[wi] [ b′

> i

]. (19) Finally, the servers execute a coordinate-wise MPC-Sign to derive the next trusted direction. All arithmetic and comparison primitives are linear in both the number of clients K and the model dimension d, so the entire aggregation achieves O(Kd )

computational and communication complexity. Compared with mixnet-style or three-server verifiable shuf-fles, RAIN’s two-server protocol performs all robust aggrega-tion steps, including Hamming distance computation, ReLU weighting, and sign extraction, directly over additive secret shares without relying on any public-key or zero-knowledge operations. This greatly reduces both computation and band-width. All randomness comes from symmetric-key PRG ex-pansion, and every MPC primitive involves only linear rounds of interaction. Consequently, the protocol preserves the privacy amplification effect of Shuffle-DP, while securely realizing geometry-free robust aggregation inside the encrypted domain. By tightly integrating encrypted shuffling with robust sign-space aggregation, RAIN provides a practical and scalable realization of end-to-end privacy, correctness, and robustness within the Shuffle-DP federated learning paradigm using only two servers. 

D. Streaming Integrity Verification 

Existing approaches for malicious-secure shuffling, such as verifiable mixnets [40] and three-party ZK-based protocols, achieve correctness through heavy public-key proofs or batch audit phases. While these designs guarantee integrity, they incur prohibitive costs for high-dimensional FL updates, re-quiring multiple encryption rounds, NIZK proofs, or offline audits for each permutation. Moreover, post-shuffle verifica-tion enables selective-failure attacks, where a malicious server perturbs a small subset of shuffled entries and infers sensitive information from which verification checks fail. Hence, ex-isting solutions cannot ensure real-time malicious security in practical federated settings. To overcome these limitations, RAIN introduces a streaming integrity verification layer that achieves continuous, online detection of integrity violations within the shuffle pipeline, without revealing any permutation or message content. 

Streaming MAC Construction. Our protocol adopts a Carter Wegman symmetric message authentication code [24], modified to support one-time authentication over secret-shared data streams. Let [r] = ([ r](0) , [r](1) ) denote an additive share of a masked vector in Zdp. For a PRG-derived MAC key 

kt ∈ Zdp generated from a time-dependent seed seed t, the streaming MAC tag is computed as: 

t =

> d

X

> j=1

kt[j] · r[j]. (20) Both servers expand the shared seed using a synchronized PRG G, yielding additive key shares k(0)  

> t

+ k(1)  

> t

= kt mod p,so that neither server learns the complete key. At each shuffle iteration t, both servers compute and exchange the tag of each re-masked share: 

tag (j) 

> i

= MAC k(j)

> t

(b′(j) 

> i

), (21) and verify upon receipt: 

Verify  MAC k(j)

> t

(b′(j) 

> i

), tag (j)

> i

 = 1 . (22) 8If verification fails, the corrupted message is immediately discarded and the protocol halts. Since seed t evolves with the shuffle round index, no MAC key is ever reused, and the verification process leaks no information about client identities or the global permutation π.

Protocol Integration. The streaming MAC mechanism is embedded directly into the MPC shuffle pipeline. When S0 and 

S1 perform the re-masking operation b′(0)  

> i

= π0(b(0)  

> i

) + r0[i]

and b′(1)  

> i

= π1(b(1)  

> i

) + r1[i], each re-masked share is im-mediately accompanied by its MAC tag. Upon receiving a batch of shares, each server verifies the tags on-the-fly before proceeding to the next step of robust aggregation. This pipeline enables real-time detection of tampering or message loss within the same communication round, eliminating any offline MAC check. The verified shares are then directly input to the Hamming–ReLU aggregation stage of Algorithm 2. In Camel, post-shuffle MAC verification allows a malicious server to mount selective-failure attacks by injecting small perturbations into shuffled entries and observing which checks fail. RAIN prevents such leakage by verifying every re-masked share at streaming granularity. A corrupted share cannot reach the aggregation stage and thus reveals nothing about its posi-tion. Formally, if one server attempts to bias a single share b′(j)

> i

by adding δ, the verification equation fails with probability 

1−1/p , and the deviation is detected before any reconstruction. Therefore, the success probability of a selective-failure attack is negligible and independent of the number of clients. All streaming MAC operations involve only field additions and multiplications over Zp, introducing a constant-size tag per message. The additional communication and computation overhead remains below 1% in all evaluated settings. Because MAC generation and verification are performed on secret-shared values using synchronized PRG seeds, the process is perfectly compatible with Shuffle-DP anonymity. As a result, RAIN achieves real-time integrity protection with negligible system cost and without weakening privacy or scalability. 

Malicious-Security Guarantee. Combining two-server MPC computation with streaming MAC verification achieves the same malicious-security level as prior verifiable shuffles but at linear cost. Any undetected deviation by one corrupted server would require either (i) forging a valid MAC tag without knowledge of the complete key, or (ii) reconstructing inconsistent additive shares across servers. Both events occur with negligible probability under standard MAC unforgeability and MPC correctness assumptions. Hence, RAIN’s shuffle-and-aggregation protocol is malicious-secure against any sin-gle colluding server: no message can be dropped, modified, or replayed without detection, and every verified share is guaranteed to appear exactly once in the final aggregation. VI. E VALUATION 

A. Experimental Setup 

We evaluate our RAIN against both existing poisoning attacks and adaptive attacks in this section. 

1) Datasets: We evaluate RAIN on multiple datasets from different domains, including several image classification tasks and one human activity recognition task. Following the stan-dard practice in prior work [16], we simulate heterogeneous data distributions among clients to reflect realistic FL scenar-ios. Assume that each dataset contains M classes; we divide the clients into M groups and allocate training examples probabilistically. Each example with label l is assigned to the group l with probability q > 0, and to other groups with probability 1−qM −1 . Within each group, data are uniformly distributed to clients. The parameter q controls the non-IID degree of local data: when q = 1 /M , local data are IID; when q > 1/M , the training data become increasingly skewed across clients. Since non-IID data commonly occur in real FL deployments, we adopt q > 1/M by default to emulate such heterogeneity. 

MNIST. The MNIST dataset [41] is a 10-class digit image classification dataset, which consists of 60,000 training exam-ples and 10,000 testing examples. We set q = 0.1 in MNIST-0.1, which indicates local training data are IID among clients. We use MNIST-0.1 to show that RAIN is also effective in the IID setting. 

Fashion-MNIST. The Fashion-MNIST dataset [42] contains 60,000 training and 10,000 test images across 10 clothing categories. We distribute the samples to clients using q = 0 .5

to simulate non-IID local data, consistent with MNIST-0.5. 

CIFAR-10. The CIFAR-10 dataset [43] includes 50,000 color images for training and 10,000 for testing, spanning 10 object classes. To emulate heterogeneous data distribution, we again set q = 0 .5 for client partitioning. 

2) Poisoning Attacks for Evaluation: To comprehensively evaluate the robustness of RAIN, we consider both classical model poisoning attacks and a recent adaptive attack specifi-cally designed for DP-FL settings. 

Label Flipping (LF) Attack. Following [16], each malicious client flips the label l of its local samples to M − l − 1, where 

M is the total number of classes and l ∈ { 0, 1, . . . , M − 1}.This untargeted attack misleads the global model by reversing label semantics. 

Krum Attack. Krum [44] is an untargeted local model poisoning attack optimized for the Krum aggregation rule. Each malicious client uploads manipulated gradients crafted to be close to other malicious updates but far from benign ones, thereby biasing the aggregation result. 

Trim Attack. Trim attack [44] targets the Trim-mean and Median aggregation rules by injecting adversarial gradients that evade trimming thresholds. We adopt the same default parameters as in [44]. 

Scaling Attack. Following [45], the scaling attack is atargeted backdoor-style poisoning method. Each malicious client first augments a fraction p of its local samples with a predefined feature trigger and assigns them to an attacker-chosen label. The malicious client then scales its local model update by a large amplification factor λ ≫ 1 before uploading it to the server, causing the backdoor to dominate the aggre-gated gradient. 9Adaptive Attack on DP-FL(Attack-DPFL). Beyond conven-tional poisoning settings, we further evaluate an adaptive attack tailored to differentially private federated learning [46]. In DP-FL, benign clients perturb their gradients with Gaussian noise, resulting in large-norm perturbed gradients. Attack-DPFL exploits this property by re-scaling unperturbed poi-soned gradients to match the norm distribution of the noisy benign updates: 

Au = A G u, A = ∥Su∥∥Gu∥ , Su = h(Gu; l) + N (0 , σ 2).

(23) This alignment allows malicious updates to dominate the global aggregation while bypassing the DP noise regulariza-tion. Compared with the conventional scaling or label-flipping attacks, Attack-DPFL represents a stronger adaptive adversary that specifically targets the robustness gap introduced by DP perturbation. RAIN is evaluated against all the above attacks to demonstrate its resilience under both classical and DP-aware poisoning threats. 

B. Utility 1) Convergence under Shuffle-DP: The first experiment aims to verify that the proposed sign-space aggregation mech-anism does not hinder model convergence. Since RAIN per-forms all robust aggregation operations directly in the sign domain rather than in the real-valued gradient space, it is essential to confirm that the loss of magnitude information does not impair training stability or convergence speed. We therefore evaluate RAIN in a benign setting ( ρ = 0 ) and without privacy noise, to isolate the impact of sign-space aggregation on model optimization. Figure 3a and Figure 3b show the evolution of model ac-curacy (MA) with training iterations on FMNIST and MNIST datasets, respectively. We compare RAIN with FedAvg (the canonical aggregation baseline) and SignSGD [47](a purely sign-based method without robustness adjustment). Across both datasets, RAIN converges to a similar MA level as FedAvg within the same number of training iterations on both FMNIST and MNIST datasets. This is because RAIN employs Hamming-distance–based trust scoring to adaptively weight sign-encoded updates, allowing the aggregator to ap-proximate the behavior of full-precision averaging when δ =    

> (a) FMNIST (b) MNIST
> Fig. 3. Convergence of RAIN under Shuffle-DP ( ρ= 0 ). Model accuracy (MA) over training iterations on FMNIST,and MNIST. RAIN achieves con-vergence comparable to FedAvg while significantly outperforming SignSGD in terms of stability and final accuracy across all datasets.

0. Although the sign encoding inevitably discards magnitude information, its impact on overall optimization is negligible, since the global direction of gradients is still preserved across clients. This empirical stability directly corroborates Lemma 1, which predicts that the expected directional cosine between the aggregated sign vector and the true gradient remains above 

0.7 when ε ≥ 2, ensuring convergence comparable to non-privatized training. In contrast, SignSGD converges much slower than both FedAvg and RAIN. The reason is that SignSGD aggregates only the global sign of the summed gradients, which behaves similarly to a coordinate-wise median operator in the sign domain. Such a median-style rule implicitly excludes nearly 

K − 1 values per coordinate in each round, leading to severe information loss and oscillation in the global update direction. Consequently, SignSGD introduces substantial degradation in convergence speed and final accuracy, while RAIN maintains stable and efficient training dynamics comparable to FedAvg.     

> (a) (b)
> Fig. 4. Privacy–Robustness Trade-off of RAIN. As the privacy budget ε
> decreases, stronger DP noise slightly reduces model accuracy but also lowers the attack success rate (ASR).

2) Accuracy, Privacy, and Robustness Trade-off: We fur-ther investigate the trade-off among accuracy, privacy, and robustness in RAIN by varying the privacy budget ε under the Shuffle-DP setting. As shown in Fig. 4, when the privacy guarantee becomes stronger (i.e., smaller ε), model accuracy slightly decreases due to the heavier Gaussian noise injected during local randomization. This degradation is expected since the stronger DP protection inevitably perturbs gradient signals. However, RAIN still maintains competitive accuracy across all privacy levels, showing that the sign-space aggregation is inherently robust to noise. In addition, as ε decreases, the attack success rate (ASR) also gradually declines, indicating that stronger noise not only enhances privacy but can also suppress adversarial signal injection. Nevertheless, excessive noise weakens the distin-guishability between benign and malicious updates, causing a mild loss in robustness when privacy is overly stringent. Over-all, these results demonstrate that RAIN achieves a favorable privacy–utility–robustness balance: even under tight privacy budgets ( ε ≤ 5), it retains over 70% accuracy while keeping ASR below 40%, providing practical guidance for deploying Shuffle-DP FL systems. 

C. Robustness 

This section investigates the robustness of federated learning under adversarial conditions within the Shuffle-DP frame-10 Fig. 5. Failure of existing robust aggregation methods under Shuffle-DP Geometry-based methods (Krum, Trim-Mean, FLOD, FLAME, etc.) and reputation-based methods (FLTrust, FoolsGold, DnC, CONTRA, FLARE, etc.) are evaluated under the adaptive Attack-DPFL across three datasets. 

work. We first demonstrate that existing robust aggregation methods, both geometry-based (e.g., Krum, FLAME, FLOD) and reputation-based (e.g., FLTrust, FoolsGold, CONTRA), completely fail once client updates are anonymized and noised. We then evaluate RAIN against state-of-the-art baselines un-der multiple poisoning and adaptive attacks across MNIST, FMNIST, and CIFAR-10. 

1) Failure of Existing Robust Aggregation Methods.: We first investigate whether existing robust aggregation schemes remain effective under the Shuffle-DP setting. Figure 5presents the model accuracy under the adaptive Attack-DPFL when 20% of clients are malicious. We evaluate both geometry-based methods (Krum, Trim-Mean, Median, FLOD, FLAME, ShieldFL, and SignGuard) and reputation-based methods (FLTrust, FoolsGold, DnC, CONTRA, Romoa, and FLARE) across MNIST, FMNIST, and CIFAR-10 datasets. The results show that nearly all existing robust FL ap-proaches fail once Shuffle-DP anonymization is applied. For geometry-based methods, local noise injection distorts the geometric relationships among gradients, preventing distance-or angle-based filtering from identifying malicious updates. Consequently, the test accuracy drops dramatically, often by more than 40–50%. For example, FLAME and FLOD achieve around 90% accuracy in the non-shuffled setting but fall be-low 45% under Shuffle-DP. Similarly, reputation-based meth-ods—whose effectiveness relies on persistent identity linkage and temporal trust accumulation—lose the ability to track client behavior once the shuffler removes client identifiers. As a result, methods such as FLTrust and FoolsGold degrade to below 60% accuracy.This experiment highlights a fundamental incompatibility between existing robust aggregation mecha-nisms and the Shuffle-DP paradigm.         

> Fig. 6. Robust Aggregation of RAIN under Different Adversarial Attacks. Each plot reports model accuracy as the fraction of Byzantine clients increases from 10% to 90%.

2) Impact of the number of malicious clients.: We further investigate the robustness of RAIN under various Byzan-tine and poisoning attacks on the MNIST dataset, including Krum attack, Trim attack, Label Flipping (LF) attack, and the adaptive Attack-DPFL. These attacks jointly cover both untargeted and targeted poisoning behaviors, evaluating the model’s ability to resist malicious updates under different adversarial strategies. As shown in Fig. 6, traditional robust aggregation schemes such as Krum, Median, FLGuard, and FLOD exhibit severe performance degradation as the fraction of Byzantine clients increases. Their model accuracy sharply drops below 20% once the malicious ratio exceeds 50%, and continues to deteriorate as more adversaries join. This confirms 11 that existing geometry-based or reputation-based defenses rely heavily on clean gradient structures or persistent client iden-tities—both of which are destroyed by local perturbation and anonymization in Shuffle-DP. In stark contrast, RAIN maintains consistently high ac-curacy across all attack types, achieving around 80% MA even when up to 90% of clients behave maliciously. This stability demonstrates that RAIN effectively mitigates both Byzantine manipulations and adaptive poisoning by operating in the sign space rather than the raw gradient space. Its Hamming-distance–based trust scoring bounds the influence of extreme or inconsistent sign updates, allowing the ag-gregation process to remain stable even under heavy noise and anonymization. Overall, these results highlight that RAIN achieves significantly stronger resilience than state-of-the-art baselines while maintaining high utility in adversarial Shuffle-DP environments. 

D. Efficiency 1) Efficiency Analysis: We evaluate the communication efficiency of RAIN and compare it with representative secure Shuffle-DP frameworks, including FLGuard and Camel, on the MNIST and FMNIST datasets. Table II summarizes the per-client communication cost and the server-side overall runtime, while Fig. 7 further illustrates the communication breakdown under different communication paths and federation scales. For client-to-server (C–P) communication, Table II shows that RAIN significantly reduces the per-client bandwidth con-sumption compared to FLGuard. On MNIST, RAIN requires 25.30 KB per client per round, achieving a 60.7% reduction relative to FLGuard (64.32 KB), and exhibits communication cost comparable to Camel (25.76 KB). On FMNIST, RAIN reduces the per-client communication volume by 90.7% com-pared to FLGuard (823.6 KB), while incurring higher overhead than Camel, due to differences in model dimensionality and encoding granularity. Overall, these results indicate that sign-space representation effectively lowers client-side communi-cation compared to floating-point–based secure aggregation schemes. For server-to-server (P–P) communication, Fig. 7(b–c) show that RAIN exhibits sub-linear growth with respect to the number of clients K, remaining in the megabyte (MB) range even for large-scale federations. In contrast, both Camel and FLGuard incur gigabyte-level (GB) communication overhead as K increases, due to repeated re-masking, clustering, and                                        

> TABLE II COMMUNICATION AND RUNTIME COST COMPARISON
> Method Dataset Per-Client Comm. Cost (KB) Server-Side Overall Runtime (s) Camel [21] MNIST 25.76 0.954 FMNIST 28.13 0.989 FLguard [28] MNIST 64.32 5.264 FMNIST 823.6 7.486 RAIN MNIST 25.30 0.910 FMNIST 76.43 0.980
> (a) C–P Communication
> (b) P–P Communication (MNIST) (c) P–P Communication (FMNIST)
> Fig. 7. Communication Efficiency of RAIN. (a) Client-to-server (C–P) communication per aggregation on MNIST and FMNIST. (b–c) Server-to-server (P–P) communication under different numbers of clients K(log scale). TABLE III COMPUTATION COST COMPARISON
> Method Dataset Per-Client Comp. Cost (s) Server-Side Comp. Cost (s) Camel [21] MNIST 0.046 0.031 FMNIST 0.059 0.154 FLguard [28] MNIST 0.210 0.420 FMNIST 0.636 0.470 RAIN MNIST 0.055 0.052 FMNIST 0.063 0.067

multi-round coordination among aggregation servers. This demonstrates that RAIN offers substantially improved com-munication scalability under Shuffle-DP. We further evaluate the computation efficiency of RAIN and compare it with representative secure federated learning frameworks, including FLGuard and Camel. Table III reports the per-client and server-side computation cost on the MNIST and FMNIST datasets. Specifically, the per-client computation cost of RAIN is only 0.055 s on MNIST and 0.063 s on FMNIST—approximately 

4–5× lower than FLGuard. This efficiency gain is mainly attributed to the streamlined sign-space aggregation, which eliminates expensive cryptographic operations during local updates. On the server side, RAIN’s computation cost remains lightweight ( ≈0.05–0.07 s) due to its two-server MPC design, which performs secure shuffling and aggregation directly on additive shares without costly zero-knowledge or re-masking procedures. As a result, RAIN reduces the overall runtime by more than 7× compared to FLGuard, demonstrating its practi-cality for large-scale federated deployments under Shuffle-DP. VII. D ISCUSSION 

Our analysis shows that RAIN achieves stable aggregation under moderate privacy budgets, where noise-induced sign flips remain bounded, indicating the existence of a practical 12 operating regime for robust aggregation under Shuffle-DP. A natural direction for future work is to more precisely characterize this regime by establishing tighter relationships between privacy budgets, local noise, and DP-aware adversar-ial strategies. While such an analysis is feasible within the RAIN framework, it is left for future work due to scope and time constraints. To focus on this core interaction between privacy and robustness, the current study assumes independent and iden-tically distributed (IID) client data. Extending RAIN to non-IID settings and to more realistic deployment scenarios, in-cluding asynchronous participation and stronger server-side adversaries, remains an important and promising direction for future research. VIII. C ONCLUSION 

This work demonstrates that the shuffle model of differential privacy fundamentally breaks the assumptions underpinning existing geometry and reputation based robust aggregation defenses. Local noise erases meaningful geometric relations among updates, while shuffling destroys identity continuity, causing prior approaches to collapse under adaptive and Byzantine attacks. Taken together, these findings reveal a critical gap between privacy amplification and adversarial robustness in widely adopted Shuffle-DP pipelines. To bridge this gap, we propose RAIN, a unified framework that reconciles privacy, robustness, and verifiable integrity under Shuffle-DP. RAIN departs from geometry-dependent aggregation and instead operates in the sign space, leveraging consistency-based trust scoring to bound malicious influence without relying on client identities. By instantiating this mech-anism within a secret-shared shuffle-and-aggregation pipeline and enforcing streaming integrity verification, RAIN achieves malicious security while preserving Shuffle-DP’s privacy guar-antees and avoiding the heavy overheads typically associated with public-key or zero-knowledge techniques. Extensive evaluations across standard benchmarks show that RAIN is both secure and practical. It consistently withstands strong poisoning and adaptive attacks, maintains competitive model accuracy, and substantially improves communication efficiency and aggregation latency compared to prior robust defenses under Shuffle-DP. These results confirm that robust and verifiable federated learning can be achieved without sacrificing differential privacy. REFERENCES [1] B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A. y Arcas, “Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized data,” in Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, AISTATS 2017, 20-22 April 2017, Fort Lauderdale, FL, USA , ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, A. Singh and X. J. Zhu, Eds., vol. 54. PMLR, 2017, pp. 1273–1282. [Online]. Available: http://proceedings.mlr.press/v54/mcmahan17a.html [2] M. P. Uddin, Y. Xiang, M. Hasan, J. Bai, Y. Zhao, and L. Gao, “A systematic literature review of robust federated learning: Issues, solutions, and future research directions,” ACM Comput. Surv. ,vol. 57, no. 10, pp. 245:1–245:62, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3727643 [3] L. Zhu, Z. Liu, and S. Han, “Deep leakage from gradients,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2019, NeurIPS 2019, December 8-14, 2019, Vancouver, BC, Canada , H. M. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d’Alch´ e-Buc, E. B. Fox, and R. Garnett, Eds., 2019, pp. 14 747–14 756. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/ paper/2019/hash/60a6c4002cc7b29142def8871531281a-Abstract.html [4] E. Bagdasaryan, A. Veit, Y. Hua, D. Estrin, and V. Shmatikov, “How to backdoor federated learning,” in The 23rd International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, AISTATS 2020, 26-28 August 2020, Online [Palermo, Sicily, Italy] , ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, S. Chiappa and R. Calandra, Eds., vol. 108. PMLR, 2020, pp. 2938–2948. [Online]. Available: http://proceedings.mlr.press/v108/bagdasaryan20a.html [5] C. Dwork and A. Roth, “The algorithmic foundations of differential privacy,” Found. Trends Theor. Comput. Sci. , vol. 9, pp. 211–407, 2014. [Online]. Available: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID: 207178262 [6] M. Abadi, A. Chu, I. J. Goodfellow, H. B. McMahan, I. Mironov, K. Talwar, and L. Zhang, “Deep learning with differential privacy,” in Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security, Vienna, Austria, October 24-28, 2016 ,E. R. Weippl, S. Katzenbeisser, C. Kruegel, A. C. Myers, and S. Halevi, Eds. ACM, 2016, pp. 308–318. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/2976749.2978318 [7] S. P. Kasiviswanathan, H. K. Lee, K. Nissim, S. Raskhodnikova, and A. D. Smith, “What can we learn privately?” SIAM J. Comput. , vol. 40, no. 3, pp. 793–826, 2011. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1137/090756090 [8] M. A. P. Chamikara, D. Liu, S. Camtepe, S. Nepal, M. Grobler, P. Bert´ ok, and I. Khalil, “Local differential privacy for federated learning,” in Computer Security - ESORICS 2022 - 27th European Symposium on Research in Computer Security, Copenhagen, Denmark, September 26-30, 2022, Proceedings, Part I , ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, V. Atluri, R. D. Pietro, C. D. Jensen, and W. Meng, Eds., vol. 13554. Springer, 2022, pp. 195–216. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-17140-6 10 [9] P. Kairouz, Z. Liu, and T. Steinke, “The distributed discrete gaussian mechanism for federated learning with secure aggregation,” in Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2021, 18-24 July 2021, Virtual Event , ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, M. Meila and T. Zhang, Eds., vol. 139. PMLR, 2021, pp. 5201–5212. [Online]. Available: http://proceedings.mlr.press/v139/kairouz21a.html [10] B. Balle, J. Bell, A. Gasc´ on, and K. Nissim, “The privacy blanket of the shuffle model,” in Advances in Cryptology - CRYPTO 2019 - 39th Annual International Cryptology Conference, Santa Barbara, CA, USA, August 18-22, 2019, Proceedings, Part II , ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, A. Boldyreva and D. Micciancio, Eds., vol. 11693. Springer, 2019, pp. 638–667. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-26951-7 22 [11] ´U. Erlingsson, V. Feldman, I. Mironov, A. Raghunathan, S. Song, K. Talwar, and A. Thakurta, “Encode, shuffle, analyze privacy revisited: Formalizations and empirical evaluation,” CoRR , vol. abs/2001.03618, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2001.03618 [12] Z. Alebouyeh and A. J. Bidgoly, “Benchmarking robustness and privacy-preserving methods in federated learning,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst. , vol. 155, pp. 18–38, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.future.2024.01.009 [13] P. Blanchard, E. M. E. Mhamdi, R. Guerraoui, and J. Stainer, “Machine learning with adversaries: Byzantine tolerant gradient descent,” in 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2017, December 4-9, 2017, Long Beach, CA, USA , I. Guyon, U. von Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. M. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. V. N. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett, Eds., 2017, pp. 119–129. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/ paper/2017/hash/f4b9ec30ad9f68f89b29639786cb62ef-Abstract.html [14] D. Yin, Y. Chen, K. Ramchandran, and P. L. Bartlett, “Byzantine-robust distributed learning: Towards optimal statistical rates,” in Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2018, Stockholmsm¨ assan, Stockholm, Sweden, July 10-15, 2018 , ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, J. G. Dy and A. Krause, Eds., vol. 80. PMLR, 2018, pp. 5636–5645. [Online]. Available: http://proceedings.mlr.press/v80/yin18a.html 

13 [15] T. D. Nguyen, P. Rieger, H. Chen, H. Yalame, H. M¨ ollering, H. Fereidooni, S. Marchal, M. Miettinen, A. Mirhoseini, S. Zeitouni, F. Koushanfar, A. Sadeghi, and T. Schneider, “FLAME: taming backdoors in federated learning,” in 31st USENIX Security Symposium, USENIX Security 2022, Boston, MA, USA, August 10-12, 2022 ,K. R. B. Butler and K. Thomas, Eds. USENIX Association, 2022, pp. 1415–1432. [Online]. Available: https://www.usenix.org/conference/ usenixsecurity22/presentation/nguyen [16] X. Cao, M. Fang, J. Liu, and N. Z. Gong, “Fltrust: Byzantine-robust federated learning via trust bootstrapping,” in 28th Annual Network and Distributed System Security Symposium, NDSS 2021, virtually, February 21-25, 2021 . The Internet Society, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.ndss-symposium.org/ndss-paper/ fltrust-byzantine-robust-federated-learning-via-trust-bootstrapping/ [17] C. Fung, C. J. M. Yoon, and I. Beschastnikh, “Mitigating sybils in federated learning poisoning,” CoRR , vol. abs/1808.04866, 2018. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1808.04866 [18] N. Wang, C. Zhang, Y. Xiao, Y. Chen, W. Lou, and Y. T. Hou, “FLARE: defending federated learning against model poisoning attacks via latent space representations,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secur. Comput. , vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 2607–2623, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/TDSC.2024.3521297 [19] Z. Zhou, C. Xu, M. Wang, X. Kuang, Y. Zhuang, and S. Yu, “A multi-shuffler framework to establish mutual confidence for secure federated learning,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secur. Comput. ,vol. 20, no. 5, pp. 4230–4244, 2023. [Online]. Available: https: //doi.org/10.1109/TDSC.2022.3215574 [20] E. Chen, Y. Cao, and Y. Ge, “A generalized shuffle framework for privacy amplification: Strengthening privacy guarantees and enhancing utility,” in Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, AAAI 2024, Thirty-Sixth Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence, IAAI 2024, Fourteenth Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence, EAAI 2014, February 20-27, 2024, Vancouver, Canada , M. J. Wooldridge, J. G. Dy, and S. Natarajan, Eds. AAAI Press, 2024, pp. 11 267–11 275. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v38i10.29005 [21] S. Xu, Y. Zheng, and Z. Hua, “Camel: Communication-efficient and maliciously secure federated learning in the shuffle model of differential privacy,” in Proceedings of the 2024 on ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security, CCS 2024, Salt Lake City, UT, USA, October 14-18, 2024 , B. Luo, X. Liao, J. Xu, E. Kirda, and D. Lie, Eds. ACM, 2024, pp. 243–257. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3658644.3690200 [22] Y. Li, Y. Wang, Q. Fan, Z. Pan, Y. Wu, Z. Zhang, L. Zhu, and W. Zhou, “Secure multi-party learning: Fundamentals, frameworks, state of the art, trends, and challenges,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng. , vol. 12, no. 5, pp. 3864–3887, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/TNSE.2025.3566140 [23] J. Fu, Y. Hong, X. Ling, L. Wang, X. Ran, Z. Sun, W. H. Wang, Z. Chen, and Y. Cao, “Differentially private federated learning: A systematic review,” CoRR , vol. abs/2405.08299, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2405.08299 [24] R. Liu, Y. Cao, H. Chen, R. Guo, and M. Yoshikawa, “FLAME: differentially private federated learning in the shuffle model,” in 

Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, AAAI 2021, Thirty-Third Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence, IAAI 2021, The Eleventh Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence, EAAI 2021, Virtual Event, February 2-9, 2021 . AAAI Press, 2021, pp. 8688–8696. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v35i10.17053 [25] S. Addanki, K. Garbe, E. Jaffe, R. Ostrovsky, and A. Polychroniadou, “Prio+: Privacy preserving aggregate statistics via boolean shares,” in Security and Cryptography for Networks - 13th International Conference, SCN 2022, Amalfi, Italy, September 12-14, 2022, Proceedings , ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, C. Galdi and S. Jarecki, Eds., vol. 13409. Springer, 2022, pp. 516–539. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-14791-3 23 [26] H. Corrigan-Gibbs and D. Boneh, “Prio: Private, robust, and scalable computation of aggregate statistics,” in 14th USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation, NSDI 2017, Boston, MA, USA, March 27-29, 2017 , A. Akella and J. Howell, Eds. USENIX Association, 2017, pp. 259–282. [Online]. Available: https://www.usenix.org/conference/nsdi17/technical-sessions/ presentation/corrigan-gibbs [27] M. Rathee, C. Shen, S. Wagh, and R. A. Popa, “ELSA: secure aggregation for federated learning with malicious actors,” in 44th IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy, SP 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA, May 21-25, 2023 . IEEE, 2023, pp. 1961–1979. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/SP46215.2023.10179468 [28] T. D. Nguyen, P. Rieger, H. Yalame, H. M¨ ollering, H. Fereidooni, S. Marchal, M. Miettinen, A. Mirhoseini, A. Sadeghi, T. Schneider, and S. Zeitouni, “FLGUARD: secure and private federated learning,” 

CoRR , vol. abs/2101.02281, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/ abs/2101.02281 [29] Y. Dong, X. Chen, K. Li, D. Wang, and S. Zeng, “FLOD: oblivious defender for private byzantine-robust federated learning with dishonest-majority,” in Computer Security - ESORICS 2021 - 26th European Symposium on Research in Computer Security, Darmstadt, Germany, October 4-8, 2021, Proceedings, Part I , ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, E. Bertino, H. Schulmann, and M. Waidner, Eds., vol. 12972. Springer, 2021, pp. 497–518. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-88418-5 24 [30] Y. Han, Y. Cao, and M. Yoshikawa, “Understanding the interplay between privacy and robustness in federated learning,” CoRR , vol. abs/2106.07033, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2106. 07033 [31] D. Cao, S. Chang, Z. Lin, G. Liu, and D. Sun, “Understanding distributed poisoning attack in federated learning,” in 25th IEEE International Conference on Parallel and Distributed Systems, ICPADS 2019, Tianjin, China, December 4-6, 2019 . IEEE, 2019, pp. 233–239. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/ICPADS47876.2019.00042 [32] A. N. Bhagoji, S. Chakraborty, P. Mittal, and S. B. Calo, “Analyzing federated learning through an adversarial lens,” in Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2019, 9-15 June 2019, Long Beach, California, USA , ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, K. Chaudhuri and R. Salakhutdinov, Eds., vol. 97. PMLR, 2019, pp. 634–643. [Online]. Available: http://proceedings.mlr.press/v97/bhagoji19a.html [33] Z. Ma, J. Ma, Y. Miao, Y. Li, and R. H. Deng, “Shieldfl: Mitigating model poisoning attacks in privacy-preserving federated learning,” 

IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur. , vol. 17, pp. 1639–1654, 2022. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/TIFS.2022.3169918 [34] Z. Xiang, T. Wang, W. Lin, and D. Wang, “Practical differentially private and byzantine-resilient federated learning,” Proc. ACM Manag. Data , vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 119:1–119:26, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3589264 [35] V. Shejwalkar and A. Houmansadr, “Manipulating the byzantine: Op-timizing model poisoning attacks and defenses for federated learning,” in 28th Annual Network and Distributed System Security Symposium, NDSS 2021, virtually, February 21-25, 2021 . The Internet Society, 2021. [36] Y. Mao, Z. Ye, X. Yuan, and S. Zhong, “Secure model aggregation against poisoning attacks for cross-silo federated learning with robustness and fairness,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur. , vol. 19, pp. 6321–6336, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/TIFS. 2024.3416042 [37] I. Mironov, “R´ enyi differential privacy,” in 30th IEEE Computer Security Foundations Symposium, CSF 2017, Santa Barbara, CA, USA, August 21-25, 2017 . IEEE Computer Society, 2017, pp. 263–275. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/CSF.2017.11 [38] M. Hao, H. Li, G. Xu, H. Chen, and T. Zhang, “Efficient, private and robust federated learning,” in ACSAC ’21: Annual Computer Security Applications Conference, Virtual Event, USA, December 6 - 10, 2021 . ACM, 2021, pp. 45–60. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3485832.3488014 [39] H. Zhu and Q. Ling, “Bridging differential privacy and byzantine-robustness via model aggregation,” in Proceedings of the Thirty-First International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI 2022, Vienna, Austria, 23-29 July 2022 , L. D. Raedt, Ed. ijcai.org, 2022, pp. 2427–2433. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.24963/ijcai.2022/337 [40] X. Liu, H. Li, G. Xu, Z. Chen, X. Huang, and R. Lu, “Privacy-enhanced federated learning against poisoning adversaries,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur. , vol. 16, pp. 4574–4588, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/TIFS.2021.3108434 [41] Y. LeCun, “The mnist database of handwritten digits,” http://yann. lecun. com/exdb/mnist/ , 1998. [42] H. Xiao, K. Rasul, and R. Vollgraf, “Fashion-mnist: a novel image dataset for benchmarking machine learning algorithms,” CoRR , vol. 

14 abs/1708.07747, 2017. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1708. 07747 [43] A. Krizhevsky, G. Hinton et al. , “Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images,” 2009. [44] M. Fang, X. Cao, J. Jia, and N. Z. Gong, “Local model poisoning attacks to byzantine-robust federated learning,” in Proceedings of the 29th USENIX Conference on Security Symposium , ser. SEC’20. USA: USENIX Association, 2020. [45] J. So, B. G¨ uler, and A. S. Avestimehr, “Byzantine-resilient secure federated learning,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun. , vol. 39, no. 7, pp. 2168–2181, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/JSAC. 2020.3041404 [46] T. Qi, H. Wang, and Y. Huang, “Towards the robustness of differentially private federated learning,” in Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, AAAI 2024, Thirty-Sixth Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence, IAAI 2024, Fourteenth Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence, EAAI 2014, February 20-27, 2024, Vancouver, Canada , M. J. Wooldridge, J. G. Dy, and S. Natarajan, Eds. AAAI Press, 2024, pp. 19 911–19 919. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v38i18.29967 [47] J. Bernstein, Y. Wang, K. Azizzadenesheli, and A. Anandkumar, “SIGNSGD: compressed optimisation for non-convex problems,” in 

Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2018, Stockholmsm¨ assan, Stockholm, Sweden, July 10-15, 2018 ,ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, J. G. Dy and A. Krause, Eds., vol. 80. PMLR, 2018, pp. 559–568. [Online]. Available: http://proceedings.mlr.press/v80/bernstein18a.html 

APPENDIX 

A. Convergence of Sign-based Aggregation 

Let gi ∈ Rd be the local gradient of client i and g∗ be the true global gradient. Each client uploads a sign-encoded vector ˜gi = sign( gi + N (0 , σ 2)) under local randomization. Prior works [3], [7] show that when each coordinate of gi

independently satisfies Pr[sign(˜ gij ) = sign( g∗ 

> j

)] > 12 , the aggregated sign ˜gagg = sign( P 

> i

˜gi) is an unbiased estimator of sign( g∗) in expectation: 

E[˜ gj

> agg

] = (2 pj −1) sign( g∗ 

> j

), pj = Pr[sign(˜ gij ) = sign( g∗ 

> j

)] .

Thus, as long as the majority of clients are benign ( pj >

0.5), the expected update direction remains aligned with the true gradient, and convergence toward the global optimum is guaranteed in the same asymptotic rate as standard stochastic gradient descent [47]. Formally, 

E[f (wt+1 ) − f (w∗)] ≤ (1 − ημ )t f (w0) − f (w∗) + O(ησ 2),

where η is the learning rate and μ is the smoothness parameter. This indicates that sign encoding, even under random noise and shuffling, preserves convergence up to a bounded constant term. 

B. Hamming Distance as a Robust Similarity Metric 

To quantify the similarity between two sign vectors 

˜wi, ˜ws ∈ {− 1, 1}d, we start from the cosine similarity: 

ci = ˜wi · ˜ws

∥ ˜wi∥∥ ˜ws∥ = 1

d

> d

X

> j=1

˜wij ˜wsj .

Since each coordinate takes values in {− 1, 1}, we can rewrite: 

ci = 1

d

> d

X

> j=1

(1 − 2E( ˜ wij )) · (1 − 2E( ˜ wsj )) = 1 − 2

d

> d

X

> j=1

 E( ˜ wij ) + E( ˜ wsj ) − 2E( ˜ wij )E( ˜ wsj )

= 1 − 2

d

> d

X

> j=1

E( ˜ wij ) ⊕ E( ˜ wsj )= 1 − 2 hd i

d ,

where hd i = Pdj=1 1[ ˜ wij ̸ = ˜wsj ] is the Hamming distance between the two sign vectors. Thus, ci > 0 ⇔ 1 − 2hd i/d > 0 ⇔ hd i < d/ 2. Therefore, with threshold τ = d/ 2, we have 

νi > 0 ⇔ ci > 0,

which means that a τ -clipping Hamming distance–based rule is equivalent to cosine-similarity clipping in detecting poi-soned sign updates. Moreover, our τ -clipping formulation 

wi = ReLU( τ − hd i)

generalizes cosine-based clipping (e.g., FLTrust) by allowing tunable τ , making the Hamming-distance metric more flexible and adaptive across datasets and noise levels. 15