Title: Probabilistic Feature Imputation and Uncertainty-Aware Multimodal Federated Aggregation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.12970v1

Published Time: Wed, 15 Apr 2026 01:44:54 GMT

Number of Pages: 15

Markdown Content:
> Proceedings of Machine Learning Research – nnn:1–15, 2026 Full Paper – MIDL 2026

# Probabilistic Feature Imputation and Uncertainty-Aware Multimodal Federated Aggregation 

Nafis Fuad Shahid 1 nafisfuad21@iut-dhaka.edu 

Maroof Ahmed ∗1 maroofahmed@iut-dhaka.edu 

Md Akib Haider ∗1 akibhaider@iut-dhaka.edu 

Saidur Rahman Sagor 1 saidurrahman@iut-dhaka.edu 

Aashnan Rahman 1 aashnanrahman@iut-dhaka.edu 

Md Azam Hossain 1 azam@iut-dhaka.edu  

> 1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Islamic University and Technology (IUT), Gazipur, Bangladesh 

Editors: Accepted for publication at MIDL 2026 

Abstract 

Multimodal federated learning enables privacy-preserving collaborative model training health-care applications. However, a fundamental challenge arises from modality heterogeneity: many clinical sites possess only a subset of modalities due to resource constraints or work-flow variations. Existing approaches address this through feature imputation networks that synthesize missing modality representations, yet these methods produce point es-timates without reliability measures, forcing downstream classifiers to treat all imputed features as equally trustworthy. In safety-critical medical applications, this limitation poses significant risks. We propose the Probabilistic Feature Imputation Network (P-FIN), which outputs calibrated uncertainty estimates alongside imputed features. This uncertainty is leveraged at two levels: (1) locally, through sigmoid gating that attenuates unreliable feature dimensions before classification, and (2) globally, through Fed-UQ-Avg, an aggregation strategy that prioritizes updates from clients with reliable imputation. Experiments on federated chest X-ray classification using CheXpert, NIH Open-I, and PadChest demonstrate consistent improvements over deterministic baselines, with +5.36% AUC gain in the most challenging configuration. Code implementation is available at https://github.com/NafisFuadShahid/PFIN-UQAVG 

Keywords: Federated Learning, Multimodal Learning, Uncertainty Quantification, Fea-ture Imputation, Medical Imaging 

1. Introduction 

In modern healthcare, relying on a single source of information to formulate a diagnosis is insufficient and potentially unsafe (Teoh et al., 2024). Instead, diverse data types, such as radiological images, clinical history, and textual reports are synthesized. Research consis-tently shows that multimodal models, which learn from both images and text, significantly outperform models that rely on images alone (Huang et al., 2020; Acosta et al., 2022). For instance, in chest X-ray analysis, combining the visual scan with the radiologist’s textual report enables the system to capture complex medical conditions with greater accuracy (Zhang et al., 2022; Boecking et al., 2022).  

> ∗

Contributed equally             

> ©2026 CC-BY 4.0, N.F. Shahid , M. Ahmed , M.A. Haider , S.R. Sagor , A. Rahman & M.A. Hossain .
> arXiv:2604.12970v1 [eess.IV] 14 Apr 2026 Shahid Ahmed Haider Sagor Rahman Hossain

However, the development of these collaborative AI models is constrained by strict privacy regulations. Laws such as HIPAA and GDPR prohibit the centralization of patient data across institutions (Price and Cohen, 2019). To address this, Federated Learning (FL) was introduced (McMahan et al., 2017) to collaboratively train a shared model without transferring patient data off-site among hospitals. Data remains private locally, and only model updates are shared (Rieke et al., 2020; Sheller et al., 2020). While Federated Learning resolves privacy concerns, it encounters a practical challenge known as modality heterogeneity. In real-world deployments, resources vary significantly across institutions. Large academic medical centers often possess complete datasets com-prising both X-rays and detailed reports. Conversely, smaller clinics or rural hospitals may only have access to X-ray images, lacking the infrastructure to provide structured text data (Rajpurkar et al., 2017; Warnat-Herresthal et al., 2021). This disparity creates a network where some participants possess complete multimodal data, while others hold incomplete unimodal data. To mitigate this missing data problem, early research proposed feature imputation, which trains the model to synthesize the missing modality. For example, if a clinic provides only an image, the model predicts the corresponding text report based on visual patterns (Ngiam et al., 2011). Recent approaches, such as SMIL (Ma et al., 2021), have refined this process for complex datasets. However, a critical flaw persists in these methods: they are deterministic. A deterministic model produces a single confident prediction even when guessing, potentially hallucinating a text description for an ambiguous image with high confidence. In safety-critical medical domains, such silent failures can lead to erroneous diagnoses (Jungo and Reyes, 2019; Nair et al., 2020). We argue that AI systems must be transparent about their limitations. Regulatory bodies, including the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA), explicitly state the need to develop methods to quantify uncertainty and convey it in the device output to users (U.S. Food and Drug Administration, 2024). This concept, known as Uncertainty Quantification (UQ), is essential for safety. Foundational work by Kendall and Gal (2017) established methods to measure this uncertainty in deep learning. By integrating UQ, a model can report high uncertainty when input data is ambiguous, thereby warning clinicians not to trust the synthetic features. In this paper, we propose the Probabilistic Feature Imputation Network (P-FIN) . Instead of deterministically estimating missing features, our model outputs a distri-bution parameterized by a mean value and a variance score. We train this network using a specialized loss function called β-NLL (Seitzer et al., 2022), which prevents the model from minimizing loss by simply predicting infinite uncertainty. We leverage this uncertainty in two distinct ways. Locally, the variance acts as a gate to suppress unreliable features before fusion. Globally, we introduce Fed-UQ-Avg , a novel aggregation method that prioritizes updates from hospitals with confident, high-quality data over those with high uncertainty. Our experiments on diverse chest X-ray datasets (Irvin et al., 2019; Bustos et al., 2020) demonstrate that this approach is significantly more robust than previous methods. 

> 2Probabilistic Feature Imputation and Uncertainty-Aware Multimodal Federated Aggregation

2. Related Work 

2.1. Missing Modalities in Federated Learning 

Feature imputation networks have emerged as a solution to missing modality challenges by learning cross-modal mapping through various architectural approaches. Early work by Ngiam et al. (Ngiam et al., 2011) introduced deterministic autoencoders for synthesizing cross modality representations. Ma et al. (Ma et al., 2021) proposed SMIL, a Bayesian meta-learning approach for severely missing modalities while Kaissis et al. (Kaissis et al., 2020) and Warnat-Herresthal et al. (Warnat-Herresthal et al., 2021) adapted deterministic feature imputation for federated medical imaging. However, existing methods produce point estimates without reliability measures, precluding uncertainty-aware downstream process-ing. 

2.2. Uncertainty Quantification in Medical Imaging 

Uncertainty estimation is critical for safety-critical medical applications, enabling systems to flag unreliable predictions for human review. Kendall and Gal (Kendall and Gal, 2017) distinguished aleatoric uncertainty (inherent data noise) from epistemic uncertainty (model ignorance), with heteroscedastic aleatoric modeling being particularly relevant for input-dependent reliability assessment. Bayesian approaches including Monte Carlo Dropout (Gal and Ghahramani, 2016) and variational inference have been applied to medical image seg-mentation (Jungo and Reyes, 2019; Nair et al., 2020) and selective prediction (Laves et al., 2020; Geifman and El-Yaniv, 2019). However, while these works primarily focus on single-modal centralized settings, uncertainty quantification remains underexplored in multimodal federated settings, where both feature imputation reliability and client contribution qual-ity must be assessed.We address this gap by introducing probabilistic feature imputation that explicitly models uncertainty during cross-modal synthesis, and leverage these uncer-tainty estimates both locally for feature gating and globally for uncertainty-aware federated aggregation. 

2.3. Calibration and Loss Functions 

Training neural networks to predict calibrated uncertainty is non-trivial. Guo et al. (Guo et al., 2017) demonstrated that modern deep networks are often miscalibrated, producing overconfident predictions. Standard Gaussian negative log-likelihood (NLL) training can lead to “variance explosion,” where models predict infinite uncertainty to minimize loss without learning meaningful representations. Recent approaches address this through var-ious regularization strategies: Lakshminarayanan et al. (Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017) proposed deep ensembles, Laves et al. (Laves et al., 2021) introduced σ-scaling for recali-bration, and Seitzer et al. (Seitzer et al., 2022) developed β-NLL loss using stop-gradient operations. We adopt β-NLL for training our probabilistic imputation network due to its effectiveness in preventing variance collapse. 

2.4. Federated Aggregation Strategies 

FedAvg (McMahan et al., 2017) remains the dominant aggregation strategy, weighting client contributions proportionally to local dataset size. FedProx (Li et al., 2020) addresses      

> 3Shahid Ahmed Haider Sagor Rahman Hossain

statistical heterogeneity through proximal regularization, while other works have explored adaptive weighting based on gradient similarity or loss values (Sheller et al., 2020; Dayan et al., 2021). However, existing aggregation strategies do not account for feature reliability in missing modality scenarios. A client with many samples but poor imputation qual-ity can degrade the global model through noisy gradient contributions. Our Fed-UQ-Avg explicitly incorporates imputation confidence, complementing data-based weighting with quality-aware adjustments. 

3. Methodology 

We consider a federated learning setting with K clients. A subset Cm (multimodal clients) possesses paired chest X-rays xI and radiology reports xT , while the remaining clients 

Cu (unimodal clients) have only images. Our objective is to enable effective multimodal learning across all clients by providing reliable imputation for missing modalities. 

3.1. Feature Encoders 

The image encoder fI employs a ResNet-50 backbone (He et al., 2016) pretrained on Ima-geNet, with the final classification layer replaced by a linear projection: 

zI = WI · ResNet( xI )

∥WI · ResNet( xI )∥2

∈ R256 (1) where WI ∈ R256 ×2048 projects ResNet features to a 256-dimensional space, followed by L2 normalization. The text encoder fT uses BERT-base-uncased (Devlin et al., 2019), extracting the [CLS] token representation with analogous projection: 

zT = WT · BERT( xT )[CLS] 

∥WT · BERT( xT )[CLS] ∥2

∈ R256 (2) where WT ∈ R256 ×768 . Both encoders output L2-normalized features to ensure compatible representation spaces. 

3.2. Probabilistic Feature Imputation Network (P-FIN) 

Unlike deterministic approaches that output a fixed vector ˆ zT , P-FIN models the conditional distribution p(zT |zI ) as a heteroscedastic Gaussian. The architecture comprises: 

Input Projection. Image features are projected and reshaped: 

h0 = GELU(LayerNorm(Linear( zI ))) ∈ R1×256 (3) 

Learnable Query Token. A learnable parameter q ∈ R1×256 is combined with h0,forming the input sequence [ q; h0] ∈ R2×256 .

Transformer Encoder. A 2-layer Transformer encoder with 4 attention heads pro-cesses the sequence: 

hL = TransformerEncoder([ q; h0]) ∈ R2×256 (4) 

> 4Probabilistic Feature Imputation and Uncertainty-Aware Multimodal Federated Aggregation

Figure 1: Overview of Stage 1: P-FIN Training. The architecture leverages a Transformer encoder to map image features to text embedding distributions, trained via β-NLL loss for calibrated uncertainty. The query output hL[0] contains the aggregated cross-modal information. 

Dual Output Heads. Two separate MLPs predict the mean and variance: 

μ = MLP μ(hL[0]) ∈ R256 (5) 

σ2 = MLP σ(hL[0]) ∈ R256 (6) The variance σ2 represents the per-dimension uncertainty , which is directly output by the network and used for both gating and aggregation throughout this work. 

3.3. Calibrated Training via β-NLL 

Standard Gaussian NLL allows models to minimize loss by predicting large variances with-out learning meaningful features. We train P-FIN using the β-NLL loss (Seitzer et al., 2022), which applies a stop-gradient to prevent this shortcut: 

Lβ-NLL = 1

d

> d

X

> j=1

SG( σ2βj ) 12 log σ2 

> j

+ (zTj − μj )2

2σ2

> j

!

(7) where SG( ·) denotes the stop-gradient operator and d = 256. Setting β = 0 .5 balances calibration with reconstruction quality, forcing the model to reduce prediction error rather than inflate uncertainty.      

> 5Shahid Ahmed Haider Sagor Rahman Hossain

Figure 2: Overview of Stage 2: P-FIN Inference. The gating mechanism g attenuates unre-liable dimensions of the imputed feature vector μ based on uncertainty σ2 before attention-guided fusion and classification. 

3.4. Local Uncertainty-Aware Fusion 

On unimodal clients, directly using imputed features μ can propagate errors when imputa-tion is unreliable. We introduce uncertainty-aware fusion that combines gating mechanisms (Arevalo et al., 2017) with cross-modal attention (Lee et al., 2018). 

Uncertainty Gating. We compute a gate from the predicted variance: 

g = sigmoid( − log σ2) ∈ R256 (8) When uncertainty σ2 is high, log σ2 becomes large, making − log σ2 strongly negative, so the gate approaches zero ( g → 0), suppressing unreliable features. Conversely, when uncertainty is low, the gate remains close to one. 

Cross-Modal Attention. Image and gated text features attend to each other bidirec-tionally: ˆzI = LN( zI + MHA( Q=zI , K =g ⊙ μ, V =g ⊙ μ)) (9) ˆzT = LN( g ⊙ μ + MHA( Q=g ⊙ μ, K =zI , V =zI )) (10) where LN denotes layer normalization and MHA is multi-head attention (Vaswani et al., 2017). 

Fusion. The attended features are concatenated and projected: 

zfused = Linear([ˆ zI ; ˆ zT ]) ∈ R256 (11) This attention-guided fusion allows the model to dynamically weight contributions from each modality based on learned relevance, while the uncertainty gating ensures unreliable imputations are suppressed before fusion. 

3.5. Global Aggregation: Fed-UQ-Avg 

Standard FedAvg weights client contributions by dataset size alone, creating vulnerability when unimodal clients produce poor imputations. Fed-UQ-Avg incorporates imputation quality through a two-component weighting scheme. 

> 6

Probabilistic Feature Imputation and Uncertainty-Aware Multimodal Federated Aggregation 

Data Weight. Standard size-proportional weight: 

w(k)data = nk

PKj=1 nj

(12) 

Confidence Weight. We compute confidence using a temperature-scaled exponential of the negative mean uncertainty: conf k = exp 



− ¯σ2

> k

T



(13) where ¯ σ2 

> k

is client k’s mean imputation uncertainty and T is a temperature parameter. The normalized confidence weight is: 

w(k)conf = conf k

PKj=1 conf j

(14) 

Combined Weight. The final aggregation weight blends both components: 

Wk = (1 − α)w(k)data + αw (k)conf (15) We set α = 0 .6 and T = 0 .2, prioritizing imputation reliability while accounting for data size. Clients with low uncertainty receive higher weights, while those with high uncertainty contribute less to the global model. 

Algorithm 1: Fed-UQ-Avg 

Input: Global Model θ0, Temperature T , Balance α, Clients K

Output: Final Model θR

for t ← 1 to R do 

Server broadcasts θt−1 to clients K;

Parallel Client Training 

for k ∈ K in parallel do if Unimodal then Impute missing modality with P-FIN, then train 

else Train with multimodal data Return θtk, ¯σ2

> k

, n k

end 

Compute Weights and Aggregate 

Ntot ← P 

> j∈K

nj

Zconf ← P 

> j∈K

exp( −¯σ2 

> j

/T )

θt ← 0for k ∈ K do 

wdata ← nk/N tot 

wconf ← exp( −¯σ2

> k

/T )/Z conf 

λk ← (1 − α)wdata + αw conf 

θt ← θt + λkθtk

end end return θR

7Shahid Ahmed Haider Sagor Rahman Hossain 

4. Experiments 

4.1. Datasets 

We use three publicly available chest X-ray datasets for our experiments. CheXpert (Irvin et al., 2019) contains 224,316 radiographs from 65,240 patients with 14 pathology labels extracted from reports. NIH Open-I (Wang et al., 2017) provides 7,470 images paired with 3,955 radiology reports, enabling multimodal learning with both visual and textual data. PadChest (Bustos et al., 2020) comprises 160,868 images from 67,000 patients, used for external validation across different institutions and patient populations. 

4.2. Baselines 

We compare against two standard heuristic approaches that serve as performance lower bounds, and a state-of-the-art deterministic imputation method representing the current standard in federated learning 

Standard Heuristics: We employ two naive heuristics: Zero-filling , which replaces missing features with null vectors (ˆ zT = 0), and Uniform-filling , which substitutes the global mean embedding, representing a static baseline that ignores sample-specific visual context. 

FIN + FedAvg: The approach proposed by (Poudel et al., 2025) uses a determinis-tic Transformer decoder to reconstruct bottleneck features via MSE loss, aggregated with standard FedAvg. Unlike our method, it produces point estimates without uncertainty quantification. 

P-FIN + FedAvg: An ablation of our method utilizing standard FedAvg. This isolates the specific contribution of our uncertainty-aware global aggregation mechanism. 

4.3. Setup and Implementation 

We simulate federated environments using K = 10 clients distributed in three configura-tions of unimodal-to-multimodal ratios (8:2, 6:4, 4:6) to reflect varying data scarcity. Data were sourced from CheXpert (unimodal) and NIH Open-I (multimodal), distributed via a Dirichlet distribution ( αDir = 0 .5) to ensure realistic non-IID label heterogeneity. PadChest was reserved for external validation. P-FIN utilizes a ResNet-50 visual backbone and BERT-base textual backbone, both projected to 256 dimensions. The imputation module consists of a 2-layer Transformer with 4 attention heads and dmodel = 256, trained with β-NLL ( β = 0 .5). For attention-guided fusion, we employ a single-head attention layer with 256-dimensional queries, keys, and values. Federated training spanned 20 communication rounds with 4 local epochs per round (batch size 32, Adam optimizer, learning rate 10 −4). The Fed-UQ-Avg hyperparameters were set to α = 0 .6 and T = 0 .2. 

4.4. Results and Analysis 

Table 1 summarizes classification performance (mean AUC across 14 classes) on held-out test data. P-FIN integrated with Fed-UQ-Avg demonstrated consistent superiority over all deterministic baselines across all configurations. 

> 8Probabilistic Feature Imputation and Uncertainty-Aware Multimodal Federated Aggregation

Table 1: Test AUC (%) across federated configurations with varying unimodal (I) to mul-timodal (M) client ratios. Best results in bold .

Method I:M = 8:2 I:M = 6:4 I:M = 4:6 

Zero-filling 72.56 ± 0.31 75.61 ± 0.33 77.86 ± 0.29 

Uniform filling 71.78 ± 0.47 74.18 ± 0.53 76.67 ± 0.46 

FIN + FedAvg 77.40 ± 0.57 79.31 ± 0.62 81.28 ± 0.83 

P-FIN + FedAvg 79.93 ± 0.79 81.72 ± 0.37 83.11 ± 0.62 

Ours (P-FIN + Fed-UQ-Avg) 82.76 ± 0.63 84.14 ± 0.49 85.89 ± 0.38 

In the most challenging 8:2 scenario, where 80% of clients lacked textual data, our ap-proach yielded a 5.36% absolute improvement over standard deterministic imputation (FIN + FedAvg). This gain emphasizes the criticality of uncertainty-aware weighting when high-quality ground truth is scarce. Convergence analysis further revealed that mean imputation uncertainty on unimodal clients decreased progressively over communication rounds, vali-dating that P-FIN successfully learned to approximate the missing modality distributions from the multimodal minority. 

Figure 3: (Left) Evolution of uncertainty estimates for all clients (0–9). Unimodal clients (0–7) are shown in blue, while multimodal clients (8–9) are in orange. (Right) 

AUC progression per round. The ablation study demonstrates the complementary value of both components: while P-FIN with standard FedAvg already improves over deterministic baselines by model-ing imputation uncertainty, the addition of Fed-UQ-Avg yields further consistent gains of 2.83%, 2.42%, and 2.78% across the three heterogeneity configurations. This confirms that uncertainty-aware aggregation is essential for fully leveraging calibrated estimates, par-ticularly in scenarios with high modality imbalance where unreliable client updates could otherwise dominate the global model.      

> 9Shahid Ahmed Haider Sagor Rahman Hossain

The attention-guided fusion mechanism proved particularly beneficial compared to sim-ple fixed-weight baselines. By allowing the model to dynamically weight the contribution of observed versus imputed features, the attention mechanism naturally leverages the gating signal to suppress unreliable imputations during feature aggregation. 

4.5. Uncertainty Calibration Analysis 

A primary claim of P-FIN is that predicted uncertainties are calibrated and meaningful. We validate this through three analyses. We measure calibration using Expected Calibration Error (ECE) (Guo et al., 2017). This quantifies the discrepancy between expected and observed coverage. Figure 4(a) shows the reliability diagram for P-FIN. The close alignment between the observed coverage curve and the perfect calibration diagonal indicates dependable calibration (ECE = 0.0422). 

(a) Reliability diagram (b) Error correlation Figure 4: Uncertainty calibration analysis. (a) Reliability diagram showing dependable calibration with ECE = 0.0422. (b) Binned analysis demonstrating strong corre-lation between predicted uncertainty and reconstruction error. We also analyzed the relationship between predicted uncertainty and actual imputa-tion error to verify that uncertainty meaningfully reflects imputation quality. Figure 4(b) presents a binned analysis where samples are grouped into deciles by predicted uncertainty. The monotonic trend with mean imputation error increasing across uncertainty deciles con-firms that high uncertainty reliably indicates low-quality imputations. 

5. Discussion 

The results substantiate the hypothesis that probabilistic modeling offers a robust defense against modality heterogeneity in federated learning. By explicitly quantifying imputation 

> 10 Probabilistic Feature Imputation and Uncertainty-Aware Multimodal Federated Aggregation

Figure 5: Qualitative Examples: Top row shows low-uncertainty cases with clear imaging; bottom row shows high-uncertainty cases with complex or ambiguous presenta-tions. uncertainty, P-FIN mitigates the risks of error propagation inherent in deterministic ap-proaches. The dual-mechanism strategy, comprising local gating and global Fed-UQ-Avg, creates a synergistic effect: local gating prevents individual classifiers from overfitting to hallucinations, while global aggregation prevents the shared model from being corrupted by clients with poor imputation capabilities. From a clinical perspective, P-FIN aligns with regulatory priorities for uncertainty quan-tification in AI-enabled medical devices (U.S. Food and Drug Administration, 2024). The ability to output a confidence metric alongside a prediction is a prerequisite for human-in-the-loop workflows, allowing radiologists to trust the model when uncertainty is low and scrutinize it when uncertainty is high. While our current implementation focuses on uni-directional image-to-text imputation, future work will explore bidirectional synthesis and the integration of epistemic uncertainty estimation to further enhance reliability in out-of-distribution scenarios.      

> 11 Shahid Ahmed Haider Sagor Rahman Hossain

6. Conclusion 

We presented P-FIN, a probabilistic framework for handling missing modalities in federated medical imaging. By replacing point estimates with calibrated distributions, P-FIN enables uncertainty-aware local fusion and quality-weighted global aggregation. Our evaluation on chest X-ray classification confirms that this “learning to distrust” paradigm significantly outperforms deterministic alternatives, particularly in data-scarce environments. This work provides a foundation for more resilient and trustworthy multimodal federated learning systems in healthcare. Future work may explore more complex multimodal application scenarios as well as alternate aggregation mechanisms. 

Acknowledgments 

We thank the contributors of the CheXpert, NIH Open-I, and PadChest datasets for making their data publicly available for research. Additionally, we wish to acknowledge Syed Rifat Raiyan and Reaz Hassan Joader, Department of Computer Science and Engineering, IUT, for their assistance in proofreading and offering a preliminary review of this manuscript 

References 

Juan N Acosta, Guido J Falcone, Pranav Rajpurkar, and Eric J Topol. Multimodal biomed-ical AI. Nature Medicine , 28(9):1773–1784, 2022. John Arevalo, Thamar Solorio, Manuel Montes y G´ omez, and Fabio A. Gonz´ alez. Gated multimodal units for information fusion. ArXiv , abs/1702.01992, 2017. Benedikt Boecking, Naoto Usuyama, Shruthi Bannur, Daniel C Castro, Anton Schwaighofer, Stephanie Hyland, Maria Wetscherek, Tristan Naumann, Aditya Nori, Javier Alvarez-Valle, et al. Making the most of text semantics to improve biomedical vision-language processing. In European Conference on Computer Vision , pages 1–21. Springer, 2022. Aurelia Bustos, Antonio Pertusa, Jose-Maria Salinas, and Maria de la Iglesia-Vay’a. Padch-est: A large chest x-ray image dataset with multi-label annotated reports. Medical Image Analysis , 66:101797, 2020. Ittai Dayan, Holger R Roth, Aiham Zhong, Ahmed Harouni, Amilcare Gentili, Abb Z Abidin, Andrew Liu, Anthony B Costa, Bradford J Wood, Chia-Sheng Tsai, et al. Fed-erated learning for predicting clinical outcomes in patients with COVID-19. Nature Medicine , 27(10):1735–1743, 2021. Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) , pages 4171–4186, 2019. Yarin Gal and Zoubin Ghahramani. Dropout as a bayesian approximation: Representing model uncertainty in deep learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning ,pages 1050–1059. PMLR, 2016. 

> 12 Probabilistic Feature Imputation and Uncertainty-Aware Multimodal Federated Aggregation

Yonatan Geifman and Ran El-Yaniv. Selective prediction for deep neural networks. In 

International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 2156–2165. PMLR, 2019. Chuan Guo, Geoff Pleiss, Yu Sun, and Kilian Q Weinberger. On calibration of modern neural networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 1321–1330. PMLR, 2017. Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 770–778, 2016. Shih-Cheng Huang, Anuj Pareek, Saeed Seyyedi, Imon Banerjee, and Matthew P Lungren. Fusion of medical imaging and electronic health records using deep learning: a systematic review and implementation guidelines. NPJ Digital Medicine , 3(1):1–9, 2020. Jeremy Irvin, Pranav Rajpurkar, Michael Ko, Yifan Yu, Silviana Ciurea-Ilcus, Chris Chute, Henrik Marklund, Behzad Haghgoo, Robyn Ball, Katie Shpanskaya, et al. Chexpert: A large chest radiograph dataset with uncertainty labels and expert comparison. In 

Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 33, pages 590–597, 2019. Alain Jungo and Mauricio Reyes. Assessing reliability and challenges of uncertainty esti-mations for medical image segmentation. In International Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention , pages 48–56. Springer, 2019. Georgios A Kaissis, Marcus R Makowski, Daniel R”uckert, and Rickmer F Braren. Secure, privacy-preserving and federated machine learning in medical imaging. Nature Machine Intelligence , 2(6):305–311, 2020. Alex Kendall and Yarin Gal. What uncertainties do we need in bayesian deep learning for computer vision? In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 30, 2017. Balaji Lakshminarayanan, Alexander Pritzel, and Charles Blundell. Simple and scalable predictive uncertainty estimation using deep ensembles. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 30. Curran Associates, Inc., 2017. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2017/file/ 9ef2ed4b7fd2c810847ffa5fa85bce38-Paper.pdf .Max-Heinrich Laves, Sontje Ihler, Karl-Philipp Kortmann, and Tobias Ortmaier. Well-calibrated regression uncertainty in medical imaging with deep learning. In Medical Imaging with Deep Learning , pages 393–412. PMLR, 2020. Max-Heinrich Laves, Sontje Ihler, Jacob F. Fast, L¨ uder A. Kahrs, and Tobias Ortmaier. Recalibration of aleatoric and epistemic regression uncertainty in medical imaging. Ma-chine Learning for Biomedical Imaging , 1:1–26, 2021. doi: 10.59275/j.melba.2021-a6fd. URL https://melba-journal.org/2021:008 .     

> 13 Shahid Ahmed Haider Sagor Rahman Hossain

Kuang-Huei Lee, Xi Chen, Gang Hua, Houdong Hu, and Xiaodong He. Stacked cross atten-tion for image-text matching. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) , September 2018. Tian Li, Anit Kumar Sahu, Manzil Zaheer, Maziar Sanjabi, Ameet Talwalkar, and Virginia Smith. Federated optimization in heterogeneous networks. In Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems , volume 2, pages 429–450, 2020. Mengmeng Ma, Jian Ren, Long Zhao, Davide Testuggine, and Xi Peng. Smil: Multimodal learning with severely missing modality. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 35, pages 2302–2310, 2021. Brendan McMahan, Eider Moore, Daniel Ramage, Seth Hampson, and Blaise Aguera y Ar-cas. Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized data. In 

Artificial Intelligence and Statistics , pages 1273–1282. PMLR, 2017. Tanya Nair, Doina Precup, Douglas L Arnold, and Tal Arbel. Exploring uncertainty mea-sures in deep networks for multiple sclerosis lesion detection and segmentation. Medical Image Analysis , 59:101557, 2020. Jiquan Ngiam, Aditya Khosla, Mingyu Kim, Juhan Nam, Honglak Lee, and Andrew Y Ng. Multimodal deep learning. In Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML-11) , pages 689–696, 2011. Pranav Poudel, Aavash Chhetri, Prashnna Gyawali, Georgios Leontidis, and Binod Bhat-tarai. Multimodal federated learning with missing modalities through feature imputation network, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.20232 .W. Nicholson II Price and I. Glenn Cohen. Privacy in the age of medical big data. Nature Medicine , 25(1):37–43, January 2019. ISSN 1546-170X. doi: 10.1038/s41591-018-0272-7. Pranav Rajpurkar, Jeremy Irvin, Kaylie Zhu, Brandon Yang, Hershel Mehta, Tony Duan, Daisy Ding, Aarti Bagul, Curtis Langlotz, Katie Shpanskaya, et al. Chexnet: Radiologist-level pneumonia detection on chest x-rays with deep learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.05225 , 2017. Nicola Rieke, Jonny Hancox, Wenqi Li, Fausto Milletar‘ı, Holger R Roth, Shadi Albarqouni, Spyridon Bakas, Mathieu N Galtier, Bennett A Landman, Klaus Maier-Hein, et al. The future of digital health with federated learning. NPJ Digital Medicine , 3(1):1–7, 2020. Maximilian Seitzer, Arash Tavakoli, Dimitrije Antic, and Marco Caccamo. On the pitfalls of heteroscedastic uncertainty estimation with probabilistic neural networks. In Interna-tional Conference on Learning Representations , 2022. Micah J Sheller, Brandon Edwards, G Anthony Reina, Jason Martin, Sarthak Pati, Aika-terini Kotrotsou, Mikhail Milchenko, Weilin Xu, Daniel Marcus, Rivka R Colen, et al. Federated learning in medicine: facilitating multi-institutional collaborations without sharing patient data. Scientific Reports , 10(1):1–12, 2020. 

> 14 Probabilistic Feature Imputation and Uncertainty-Aware Multimodal Federated Aggregation

Jing Ru Teoh, Jian Dong, Xiaowei Zuo, Khin Wee Lai, Khairunnisa Hasikin, and Xiang Wu. Advancing healthcare through multimodal data fusion: a comprehensive review of techniques and applications. PeerJ Computer Science , 10:e2298, 2024. ISSN 2376-5992. doi: 10.7717/peerj-cs.2298. eCollection 2024. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Artificial intelligence and machine learning (AI/ML) in medical devices. https: //www.fda.gov/medical-devices/software-medical-device-samd/ artificial-intelligence-and-machine-learning-software-medical-device ,2024. Accessed: 2024. Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, L ukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In I. Guyon, U. Von Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett, ed-itors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 30. Curran Associates, Inc., 2017. Xiaosong Wang, Yifan Peng, Le Lu, Zhiyong Lu, Mohammadhadi Bagheri, and Ronald M Summers. Chestx-ray8: Hospital-scale chest x-ray database and benchmarks on weakly-supervised classification and localization of common thorax diseases. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 3462–3471, 2017. Stefanie Warnat-Herresthal, Hartmut Schultze, Krishnaprasad L Shastry, Satyanarayana Manamohan, Saikat Mukherjee, Vishesh Garg, Ravi Bhatia, Hermann Hildebrand, Oisin Akogwu, Nariman Decher, et al. Swarm learning for decentralized and confidential clinical machine learning. Nature , 594(7862):265–270, 2021. Yuhao Zhang, Hang Jiang, Yasuhide Miura, Christopher D. Manning, and Curtis P. Lan-glotz. Contrastive learning of medical visual representations from paired images and text. In Zachary Lipton, Rajesh Ranganath, Mark Sendak, Michael Sjoding, and Serena Ye-ung, editors, Proceedings of the 7th Machine Learning for Healthcare Conference , volume 182 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 2–25. PMLR, 05–06 Aug 2022. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v182/zhang22a.html .