Title: Toward Resilient 5G Networks: Comparative Analysis of Federated and Centralized Learning for RF Jamming Detection

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.01705v1

Published Time: Tue, 05 May 2026 01:08:11 GMT

Number of Pages: 6

Markdown Content:
# Toward Resilient 5G Networks: Comparative Analysis of Federated and Centralized Learning for RF Jamming Detection 

Samhita Kuili, Mohammadreza Amini, Burak Kantarci 

School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada 

{skuil016, mamini6, burak.kantarci }@uottawa.ca 

Abstract —Jamming attacks are proliferating and pose a sig-nificant threat to the security of 5G and beyond networks. These attacks target 5G radio frequency (RF) domain and can disrupt the communication in wireless networks. While conventional machine learning and deep learning approaches demonstrate its potential for jamming detection, they typically require centralized data collection, compromising the privacy of user equipment (UEs). This work proposes a federated learning (FL)-based jamming detection framework that operates on over-the-air In-phase and Quadrature (IQ) samples extracted from Synchronization Signal Blocks (SSBs) in the RF domain. The framework enables collaborative model training across multiple UEs without sharing raw RF signal data. We adopt Federated Averaging (FedAvg) algorithm to train a 1D convolutional neural network (1DCNN) for effective detection of attacks. Numerical results demonstrate that the proposed FL framework achieves 97% accuracy and 97% F1-score, outperforming centralized baselines including MLP, 1DCNN, SVM, and logistic regression, while preserving the data privacy of all participating UEs. 

Index Terms —5G and beyond, Federated Learning, Jamming Detection, Convolutional neural network, Radio Frequency data 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

With the rapid proliferation of wireless devices under 5G and beyond connectivity, an extensive usage of service plays an essential component across telecommunication infrastruc-ture. The significant technical advancements such as massive multiple-input multiple output (MIMO) [1], millimeter-wave (mmwave) [2], carrier aggregation [3], software-defined radio [4] and non-orthogonal multiple access (NOMA) [5] assists in augmenting both quality of service (QoS) and quality of experience (QoE) in wireless networks. With the increasing reliance on wireless services, security threats have become a critical concern in terms of confidentiality, integrity, and availability of wireless communication. One of the security threats is jamming attacks, which are easy to launch and disrupt the communication channel shared between user equip-ments (UEs) and 5G base station gNodeB (gNB). These jamming attacks emphasizes the necessity to secure wireless networks from intentional jamming threats. Jamming attacks are predominantly directed at the physical layer (PHY), which overwhelms the legitimate wireless signal by irregular radio jamming signals. These attacks further exploit the inherent vul-nerabilities within the Synchronization Signal Blocks (SSBs), which encompass Primary and Secondary Synchronization Signals (PSS and SSS) essential for cell identification and facilitating UE association with the gNB [6], [7]. Considering the heterogeneity of UEs as well as the privacy and security concerns associated with direct wireless broadcast between UEs and gNB, accurate detection of jamming attacks in radio waveform is vital. Several conventional machine learning (ML) classifiers, including support vector machine (SVM), K-nearest neighbors (KNN), and artificial neural networks (ANN) are exploited for jamming detection [8]. On the contrary, these techniques leverage substantial amount of data for both training and testing. Moreover, as the size of the data increases, the learning and processing time increases significantly, leading to higher computational resource consumption. Furthermore, implementing these algorithms often requires domain expertise to identify the most accurate techniques. Deep learning (DL) showcases enhanced capability in detecting jammed and non-jammed waveform signals [9], [10]. However, DL model de-mands complex data which makes the overall training process computationally intensive. Additionally, it requires a compre-hensive understanding of network topology, training strategies, and parameter selection to effectively utilize appropriate DL frameworks. Federated learning (FL), a distributed learning approach, enables DL model to train locally without sharing data be-tween UEs. Thus, preserving privacy of participating UEs. In FL, individual UE conduct local model training and share only their learned parameters with a central coordinator.The coordinator aggregates these parameters to form a global model, which is broadcasted back to the UEs. FL performs an iterative training and aggregation process that continues until the global model converges [11]. Federated average (FedAvg) aggregation algorithm averages the weights of each UE’s model during aggregation phase to acquire a robust global model at each training round. This work presents an effective approach for developing an FL-based jamming detection in 5G and beyond networks. By leveraging 5G domain knowledge, we exploit SSB, a critical component of the 5G resource grid. This involves processing over-the-air In-phase and Quadrature (IQ) samples of radio waveform and extracting OFDM symbols related to SSB. The main contributions of the paper are summarized below: 1) We introduce a decentralized federated learning jam-ming detection framework across multiple UEs con-nected to 5G gNB. The framework operates directly on 

> arXiv:2605.01705v1 [cs.NI] 3 May 2026

over-the-air IQ samples extracted from Synchronization Signal Blocks (SSBs) in the 5G RF domain, ensuring data privacy of all participating UEs. 2) We conduct a comprehensive comparative analysis be-tween the FL framework and centralized AI models to assess the trade-off between privacy preservation and detection capability. The organization of this paper is as follows. In Section II, we conduct a review of related work in the field. Section III discusses about the system model adopted for jamming detection. Section IV presents the numerical results. In Section V we conclude the article. II. R ELATED WORK 

Jamming attacks are cyber-attacks that disrupt the wireless communication channel by transmitting noise at the same frequency as the legitimate wireless signals [12]. Additionally, it causes decrease in signal-to-interference-plus-noise ratio (SINR), if the interference or noise is stronger than the signal, therefore resulting into Denial of Service (Dos) of the network. This pose a critical challenge in mission-critical applications. There are different types of jamming types such as constant, deceptive, random, or reactive [13]. Ismail and Reza [14] analyze the security performance of three variants of Naive Bayes (NB) in wireless sensor networks (WSNs), while comparing them against artificial intelligence classifiers, in-cluding support vector machines (SVM), K-nearest neighbors (KNN), and multilayer perceptrons (MLP). The performance of these classifiers is assessed through the metric accuracy and detection probability. Moreover, Hachimi et al. [15] propose a multi-stage machine learning intrusion detection system (ML-IDS) in the context of 5G cloud radio access network (C-RAN) environments. This framework identifies and categorizes four jamming attack types by considering WSN-DS dataset. Ex-isting state-of-the-art AI based methods for jamming attacks rely on sensitive raw data which compromise the privacy of the UEs. Furthermore, organization such as network operators are unable to share sensitive data of UEs to enhance and update the AI learning methods due to the widespread risk of adversarial attacks. To address privacy limitations, several studies have explored FL-based approaches for wireless security. Mothukuri et al. [16] propose a recurrent neural network (RNN) as a federated learning model to detect anomalies in Internet of Things (IoT) using ModBus network dataset. Moreover, Chen et al. [17] leverage RNN-based DL models as FL process to ensure high attack detection in wireless edge-enable networks while mini-mizing the communication cost. Furthermore, Zhang et al. [18] exploit auto-encoder-based models in FL based framework for intrusion detection in the context of Internet of Things (IoT). Additionally, this study leverages NB-IoT dataset for its exper-iments and has obtained similar performance close to the cen-tralized performance. Djaidja et al. [11] propose a FL-based intrusion detection system in a 5G and beyond slicing envi-ronment by exploiting state-of-the-art FL algorithms, namely FedProx, FedPer, and SCAFFOLD. Additionally, this study takes into account two different scenarios: non-independently and non-identically distributed (Non-IID) and independently and Identically Distributed (IID) due to the diversity of 5G and beyond services. Meftah et al. [8] propose a jamming detection and waveform classification (JDWC) using FL in a distributed tactical wireless networks by focusing on spectral correlation function (SCF) i.e. the frequency domain feature of In-phase and Quadrature signals. Houda et a. [12] propose a jamming resilient intrusion detection model by adopting a secure FL framework while preserving privacy. Additionally, it leverage secure multiparty computation (SMPC) as an aggregation strategy. Furthermore, the framework is evaluated using a wireless sensor networks dataset (WSN-DS) and compared with centralized AI-based methods using metrics F1-score, accuracy, and detection rate. Over the evolution of 5G security, recent studies demon-strate a shift from conventional data-driven jamming detection to employing standard ontology-based semantic representation and formal verification; for instance, Resource Description Framework (RDF) and Shapes Constraint Language (SHACL)-based threat model frameworks. In addition, such representa-tion assumes 5G entities, interfaces, and security properties that are modeled and validated according to 3GPP speci-fications [19]–[22] rather than being treated as black-box inputs. However, the aspect of leveraging standard-traceable semantic representations and verification can be considered complementary to our proposed work. While our proposed work emphasizes on PHY-layer jamming detection, where SSB is also a standardized 5G entity, an attack on synchronization signals can be analyzed not only as anomalous RF patterns but also as an indication of severe disruption to explicit standardized functions such as synchronization, cell search access, and identification. Although our proposed method is formulated as a data-driven approach, it can be extensively extended into a standard-traceable knowledge as per 3GPP security reasoning for interpretability. While existing studies explore the machine learning and federated learning based methods, several critical gaps remain. Most existing state-of-the-art rely on benchmark datasets such as WSN-DS and NB-IoT, which do not capture the specific characteristics of 5G Radio Frequency signals. These datasets are widely explored for the domain specific task i.e. intrusion detection. However, these works do not consider 5G RF do-main, synchronization mechanisms, which are fundamental to UE-gNB association and cell identification. Additionally, [8], [13] explore FL-based jamming detection in tactical wireless networks using frequency-domain IQ features, which focuses on spectral correlation functions rather than directly exploiting the 5G resource grid structure. Furthermore, [12] and [11] address privacy preservation and non-IID data distributions, respectively, but do not evaluate their frameworks on real-world over-the-air 5G signals. Finally, to the best of our knowledge, prior work does not consider privacy-preserving jamming detection using real-world 5G RF data while bench-marking FL against centralized AI baselines under identical experimental conditions. Fig. 1. System architecture 

III. S YSTEM MODEL 

We consider a federated learning (FL) framework deployed in a 5G and beyond wireless network consisting of a server 

S employed at gNB and a set of K UEs denoted as U =

{U E 1, U E 2, . . . , U E K } shown in Fig. 1. These UEs represent heterogeneous devices supporting various 5G and beyond services. Accordingly, the framework can demonstrate a ultra-dense and heterogenous environment of 5G network. A jam-mer exists in the system, attempting to impair the legitimate wireless communication between gNB and UEs. To detect any intentional interference or jamming attack, the proposed framework exploits SSB, which is a critical component of UEs for synchronization and cell identification. The objective of the proposed framework is to detect the presence of jamming attacks by analyzing the received SSB observations. The RF data D can be represented as D = ( X, Y ), where X ∈ RP ∗Q

denotes the size of data with P SSB samples and Q IQ features and Y ∈ RP ∗1 represents the class label indicating whether the received signal is jammed or non-jammed. In 5G and beyond network, each radio cell is character-ized by a physical cell identity: cell identity group N 1

> ID

and a identity sector, N 2

> ID

. The former can be detected by UE from Secondary Synchronization Signal (SSS), and the later from Primary Synchronization Signal (PSS) respectively. Consequently, the physical cell identity of the serving cell is represented as 

N cell ID = 3 ∗ N 1 

> ID

+ N 2 

> ID

(1) This cell identification enables UE to identify and distin-guish the serving gNB from neighboring cells and establish synchronization with the transmitter. As jamming can impair the synchronization, identifying SSB is a practical approach to infer if the communication link is under attack. Let s(p) denote pth IQ sample of the SSB signal transmitted by gNB, which can be represented as 

s(j) = 

> 3

X

> l=0

sl(m) j = 0 , 1, · · · , (l × m − 1) (2) where s(j) denote the discrete-time complex baseband sample corresponding to SSB transmitted by gNB, sl(m) represents 

mth time domain sample of lth OFDM symbol in SSB, with 

m ∈ { 0, 1, · · · , N FFT − 1} and NFFT is the size of FFT. Each OFDM symbol sl(m) contains some data symbols Sl,r in the frequency domain which is transformed into time domain as, 

sl(m) = 1

NFFT NFFT −1X

> k=0

Sl,k ej2πrm/N FFT (3) The PSS, which is the first OFDM symbol of SSB, i.e. 

sl(m) |l=0 , comprises one of three 127-symbol m-sequences and is assigned to the first symbol of each SSB, covering 127 subcarriers. The three potential m-sequences for the PSS are defined as follows [23]. 

Sl,r +i |l=0 =

(

1 − 2dp(i) r ∈ { 56 , · · · , 182 }

0 Otherwise, (4) where dp(i) represents the m-sequences which are given in the 3GPP standard [24]. Similar to LTE, 5G SSS serves to detect the physical cell identity. In contrast, SSS comprises one of 336 127-symbol gold sequences, specifically assigned to the third symbol of each SSB. The 336 potential gold sequences for the SSS are outlined as follows. 

Xl,r +i |l=3 = 1 − 2ds(i + r0)mod 127 

× 1 − 2d′

> s

(i + r1) mod 127 

r ∈ { 56 , · · · , 182 } ,

(5) where r0 and r1 are derived as, 

r0 = 15 

"

N 1

> ID

112 

#

+ 5 N 2 

> ID

,r1 = N 1 

> ID

mod 112 .

(6) Furthermore, ds(i) and d′

> s

(i) can be extracted recursively as stated in 5G standard [24]. At the UE receiver, the observed SSB signal under normal operating condition is expressed as, 

x(j) = s(j) ⊛ h(j) + w(j) (7) where h(j) is the channel impulse response and w(j) is the environmental noise. In the presence of a jammer, the observed SSB signal is expressed as, 

x(j) = s(j) ⊛ h(j) + w(j) + sJ (j) (8) where sJ (j) is the jamming signal. Detected SSBs Detected SSBs Fig. 2. Time-Frequency grid taken from the 5G operator in the absence of jamming signal. Detected SSBs Detected SSBs      

> Fig. 3. Time-Frequency grid taken from the 5G operator jamming transmit gain is set to -70 dB. Detected SSBs Fig. 4. Time-Frequency grid taken from the 5G operator jamming transmit gain is set to -50 dB.
> Fig. 5. Extracted SSB in the absence of a jamming signal.
> Fig. 6. Extracted SSB- jamming transmit gain is set to -70 dB.
> Fig. 7. Extracted SSB- jamming transmit gain is set to -50 dB.

A. Federated learning 

Federated learning enables a single global model to train on data that remains on multiple separate UE in 5G network, often called clients. Each client is responsible to train on local dataset without sharing the raw data to the global model. FL instantiates an optimization problem that aims to minimize the global loss function expressed as a weighted sum of the individual client objectives shown in (9). 

min  

> w

f (w) = 

> K

X

> k=1

nk

n Fk(w), Fk(w) = 1

nk

X

> ˆi∈Pk

fˆi(w) (9) where K is the number of clients, fˆi(w) = ℓ(xˆi, y ˆi; w)

denotes the loss associated with sample ˆi, Fk is the objective function of client k, Pk is the local dataset of client k with 

nk = |Pk|, and n = PKk=1 nk. Each client k computes a local loss over the entire dataset, demonstrating its contribution, which scales to the size of the dataset relative to the total number of samples. FL aims to acquire prediction performance similar to the centralized algorithms, where all the data are centrally pooled, even though the client distribution typically varies and may not fully represent the global distribution. FL process commences by initializing 1DCNN model as global model at the server. Each client receives the model, trains it locally for a fixed number of iterations I using its own data, sends the updated parameters (weights) to the server. The global model at the server aggregates these local updates and obtains a new global model, broadcasts it again to clients, and the process repeats for several communication rounds R until convergence. In this work, we consider the FedAvg aggregation algorithm [25], which averages the weights contributed by different models communicated by clients shown in Fig.1 and (10). 

wt ← 1

n

> K

X

> k=1

nkwkt (10) where wt is the global model at round t obtained by averaging nkwkt .IV. N UMERICAL RESULTS 

A. Experimental Setting 1) Data Generation and RF Signal Visualization: The data comprises time-frequency spectrograms captured from the 5G band n71, comprising over-the-air signals from network shown in Fig. 2, Fig. 3, and Fig. 4. These include both clean signals without interference and signals impaired by Gaussian jamming generated via ADALM-PLUTO software-defined radio (SDR) with varying transmission gains to sim-ulate realistic power levels. Samples are obtained using high-resolution spectrum analysis at 15.36 MHz sampling rate. Fig. 2 shows 100 ms spectrogram of 5G network under normal operation without jamming interference, demonstrating four SSBs located in the spectrogram. Fig. 3 and 4 show another sampled spectrogram for the same network in the presence of the jamming signal, where the jammer transmission gain is set to −70 dB and −50 dB , respectively. Considering that the jamming SDR has a maximum transmission output power of 7dBm and neglecting the cable and the RF combiner loss, the received power at the node will be very low 5×10 −7 mW and 

5 × 10 −5 mW , respectively. Fig. 5, Fig. 6, and Fig. 7 illustrate the extracted 4 OFDM symbols under three different scenarios: (i) no jamming signal, (ii) jamming with a transmit gain of 

−70 dB, and (iii) jamming with a transmit gain of −40 dB. It further highlights that higher jamming power leads to greater degradation of the SSBs, making them increasingly difficult to detect.                                                 

> TABLE I PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF FL OVER CENTRALIZED AI-BASED MODELS
> Models Class Precision Recall F1-score Accuracy MLP 00.92 0.99 0.951 0.951 10.99 0.91 0.951 1DCNN 00.93 10.96 0.959 110.92 0.96 SVM 00.86 10.92 0.917 10.99 0.84 0.91 LR 00.84 0.99 0.91 0.906 10.99 0.82 0.9
> FL 00.94 10.97 0.97 110.94 0.97

2) FL setup: The simulation is considered by assuming 

K = 9 clients (UEs) for instantiating FL process for jamming detection. The real-world RF data comprises P = 14129 SSB samples and Q = 54 IQ features. We assume a train set of 11303 samples and test set of 2826 samples under 80:20 split ratio. The train data is partitioned uniformly across clients. Each client comprises local dataset with SSB observations and information of class labels jammed (1) and non-jammed (0) signals. We conducted model training and experiments using NVIDIA RTX A4000, TensorFlow’s GPU-accelerated computations through CUDA 11.2 and cuDNN 8.1. 

B. Experimental Results 1) Performance of FL: In Fig. 8, FL shows the training performance of local models (1DCNN) and evaluation of global model (1DCNN) over R = 30 communication rounds with the help of metric accuracy. The local training of FL follows the parameters chosen as discussed in Table II. The average training accuracy for all clients increases from 58.40% to 97.16%. Additionally, the global test accuracy increases from 50.24% to 96.67%. Moreover, the performance of FL is demonstrated with the help of binary cross entropy loss.   

> Fig. 8. Accuracy of FL with communication rounds
> Fig. 9. Loss of FL with communication rounds

Fig. 9 showcases average train loss decreases from 0.671 to 0.109 for all clients. Additionally, the global test loss reduces from 0.639 to 0.063. 

2) Performance comparison of FL with centralized AI-based models: In this section, we compare the performance of FL with centralized AI-based schemes in detecting jamming attacks. We utilize various metrics, such as accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-score as shown in Table I. The centralized AI-based models, including MLP [26], 1DCNN [27], SVM and LR [28] are considered for comparative analysis. These centralized models compromise data privacy as they are trained on raw SSB observations obtained collectively from all clients. FL achieves F1-score of 97%, and accuracy of 97%, outper-forming the performance of centralized models. FL showcases close and enhanced performance of jamming detection as compared to centralized models in 5G and beyond networks. TABLE II PARAMETERS /H YPERPARAMETERS FL 

Parameter/ Hyperparameter Value/Setting 

Batch Size 16 Optimizer SGD Learning Rate 0.001 Loss Function Binary Cross Entropy Number of local iterations L 1

V. C ONCLUSION 

In this article, we presented a federated learning framework for jamming attack detection in 5G and beyond wireless networks. We have evaluated our proposed framework on 5G Radio Frequency signal by exploiting a 5G resource grid to detect jamming attacks. Additionally, we have employed FedAvg aggregation algorithm to train 1DCNN model between UEs and server, achieving an accuracy and F1-score of 97%. Furthermore, we have compared with centralized AI models, including MLP, 1DCNN, SVM, and logistic regression. The comparative analysis have shown that federated learning can achieve close and enhanced detection performance as com-pared to centralized models while preserving privacy of each UE participating in FL process. These findings underscore the suitability of FL-based frameworks for security-critical applications in next-generation wireless networks. Future work will further explore interpretability of IQ-features and SSB observations using Knowledge Graph, robustness under non-IID data distributions, adversarial FL attacks such as data and model poisoning, and the integration of more advanced aggregation strategies to further strengthen the framework under realistic heterogeneous network conditions. ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

This work was supported in part by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) under Discovery and CREATE TRAVERSAL programs. REFERENCES [1] E. Bj¨ ornson and L. Sanguinetti, “Scalable cell-free massive mimo systems,” IEEE Transactions on Communications , vol. 68, no. 7, pp. 4247–4261, 2020. [2] X. Shen, Y. Liu, L. Zhao, G.-L. Huang, X. Shi, and Q. Huang, “A miniaturized microstrip antenna array at 5g millimeter-wave band,” IEEE Antennas and Wireless Propagation Letters , vol. 18, no. 8, pp. 1671– 1675, 2019. [3] A. Goyal and K. Kumar, “Lte-advanced carrier aggregation for enhance-ment of bandwidth,” in Advances in VLSI, Communication, and Signal Processing: Select Proceedings of VCAS 2018 . Springer, 2019, pp. 341–351. [4] R. Chaudhary, G. S. Aujla, N. Kumar, and P. K. Chouhan, “A compre-hensive survey on software-defined networking for smart communities,” 

Inl. J. of Communication Systems , vol. 38, no. 1, p. e5296, 2025. [5] P. K. Sangdeh, H. Pirayesh, Q. Yan, K. Zeng, W. Lou, and H. Zeng, “A practical downlink noma scheme for wireless lans,” IEEE transactions on communications , vol. 68, no. 4, pp. 2236–2250, 2020. [6] M. Giordani, M. Polese, A. Roy, D. Castor, and M. Zorzi, “A tutorial on beam management for 3gpp nr at mmwave frequencies,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials , vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 173–196, 2018. [7] H. Pirayesh and H. Zeng, “Jamming attacks and anti-jamming strategies in wireless networks: A comprehensive survey,” IEEE communications surveys & tutorials , vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 767–809, 2022. [8] A. Meftah, G. Kaddoum, T. N. Do, and C. Talhi, “Federated learning-based jamming detection for distributed tactical wireless networks,” in MILCOM 2022-2022 IEEE Military Communications Conference (MILCOM) . IEEE, 2022, pp. 629–634. [9] K. Tekbıyık, ¨O. Akbunar, A. R. Ekti, A. G¨ orc ¸in, and G. K. Kurt, “Real-world considerations for deep learning in wireless signal identification based on spectral correlation function,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.08359 , 2020. [10] M. Kulin, T. Kazaz, I. Moerman, and E. De Poorter, “End-to-end learning from spectrum data: A deep learning approach for wireless signal identification in spectrum monitoring applications,” IEEE access ,vol. 6, pp. 18 484–18 501, 2018. [11] T. E. T. Djaidja, B. Brik, A. Boualouache, S. M. Senouci, and Y. Ghamri-Doudane, “Federated learning for 5g and beyond, a blessing and a curse-an experimental study on intrusion detection systems,” Computers & Security , vol. 139, p. 103707, 2024. [12] Z. Abou El Houda, D. Naboulsi, and G. Kaddoum, “A privacy-preserving collaborative jamming attacks detection framework using federated learning,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal , vol. 11, no. 7, pp. 12 153– 12 164, 2023. [13] A. Meftah, T. N. Do, G. Kaddoum, C. Talhi, and S. Singh, “Federated learning-enabled jamming detection and waveform classification for distributed tactical wireless networks,” IEEE Transactions on Network and Service Management , vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 5053–5072, 2023. [14] S. Ismail and H. Reza, “Evaluation of na¨ ıve bayesian algorithms for cyber-attacks detection in wireless sensor networks,” in 2022 IEEE world AI IoT congress (AIIoT) . IEEE, 2022, pp. 283–289. [15] M. Hachimi, G. Kaddoum, G. Gagnon, and P. Illy, “Multi-stage jamming attacks detection using deep learning combined with kernelized support vector machine in 5g cloud radio access networks,” in Intl. Symp. on networks, computers and communications . IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–5. [16] V. Mothukuri, P. Khare, R. M. Parizi, S. Pouriyeh, A. Dehghantanha, and G. Srivastava, “Federated-learning-based anomaly detection for iot security attacks,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal , vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 2545–2554, 2021. [17] Z. Chen, N. Lv, P. Liu, Y. Fang, K. Chen, and W. Pan, “Intrusion detection for wireless edge networks based on federated learning,” IEEE Access , vol. 8, pp. 217 463–217 472, 2020. [18] T. Zhang, C. He, T. Ma, L. Gao, M. Ma, and S. Avestimehr, “Federated learning for internet of things,” in Proceedings of the 19th ACM conference on embedded networked sensor systems , 2021, pp. 413–419. [19] R. A. Paskauskas, “Decoding 5g security: toward a hybrid threat ontology,” Open Research Europe , vol. 4, p. 34, 2025. [20] M. Harvanek, J. Bolcek, J. Kufa, L. Polak, M. Simka, and R. Marsalek, “Survey on 5g physical layer security threats and countermeasures,” 

Sensors , vol. 24, no. 17, p. 5523, 2024. [21] M. Shi, J. Chen, Z. Ma, K. He, M. Jia, and R. Du, “A formal analysis of 5g eap-tls protocol,” IEEE Transactions on Networking , 2025. [22] Y. Ko, I. W. A. J. Pawana, T. Won, P. V. Astillo, and I. You, “Toward an era of secure 5g convergence applications: Formal security verification of 3gpp akma with tls 1.3 psk option,” Applied Sciences , vol. 14, no. 23, p. 11152, 2024. [23] A. Omri, M. Shaqfeh, A. Ali, and H. Alnuweiri, “Synchronization procedure in 5G NR systems,” IEEE Access , vol. 7, pp. 41 286–41 295, 2019. [24] 3GPP, “5G; NR; Physical channels and modulation,” 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP), Technical Specification (TS) 38.211, 10 2023, version 17.6.0. [Online]. Available: https://portal.3gpp.org/desktopmodules/Specifications/SpecificationDet-ails.aspx?specificationId=3213 [25] B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A. y Arcas, “Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized data,” in Artificial intelligence and statistics . Pmlr, 2017, pp. 1273– 1282. [26] I. Almomani, B. Al-Kasasbeh, and M. Al-Akhras, “Wsn-ds: a dataset for intrusion detection systems in wireless sensor networks,” Journal of Sensors , vol. 2016, no. 1, p. 4731953, 2016. [27] Q. Liu and W. Zhang, “Deep learning and recognition of radar jamming based on cnn,” in 2019 12th international symposium on computational intelligence and design (ISCID) , vol. 1. IEEE, 2019, pp. 208–212. [28] P. Killeen, C. Lin, F. Li, I. Kiringa, and T. Yeap, “Iot-based smart farming architecture using federated learning: a nitrous oxide emission prediction use case,” ACM Journal on Computing and Sustainable Societies , vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 1–38, 2025.