Title: DeZent: Decentralized z-Anonymity with Privacy-Preserving Coordination

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.08854v1

Published Time: Wed, 11 Mar 2026 00:08:57 GMT

Number of Pages: 10

Markdown Content:
# de Zent: Decentralized z-Anonymity with Privacy-Preserving Coordination 

Carolin Brunn and Florian Tschorsch 

Chair of Privacy & Security Dresden University of Technology (TU Dresden) , Germany 

{carolin.brunn, florian.tschorsch }@tu-dresden.de 

Abstract —Analyzing large volumes of sensor network data, such as electricity consumption measurements from smart me-ters, is essential for modern applications but raises significant pri-vacy concerns. Privacy-enhancing technologies like z-anonymity offer efficient anonymization for continuous data streams by suppressing rare values that could lead to re-identification, mak-ing it particularly suited for resource-constrained environments. Originally designed for centralized architectures, z-anonymity assumes a trusted central entity. In this paper, we introduce de Zent, a decentralized implementation of z-anonymity that minimizes trust in the central entity by realizing local z-ano-nymity with lightweight coordination. We develop de Zent using a stochastic counting structure and secure sum to coordinate private anonymization across the network. Our results show that de Zent achieves comparable performance to centralized 

z-anonymity in terms of publication ratio, while reducing the communication overhead towards the central entity. Thus, de Zent presents a promising approach for enhancing privacy in sensor networks while preserving system efficiency. 

Index Terms —z-anonymity, sensor networks, data streams. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Analyzing large data streams from sensor networks is in-creasingly vital for both everyday applications and industrial processes, with demand expected to grow further. In the Internet of Things (IoT), sensors are an essential component used to monitor environmental parameters such as temperature or electricity consumption [1], [2]. Collecting environmental data, however, also raises privacy concerns: continuous mea-surements can reveal sensitive information and even identify which TV series is being watched [3]–[5]. To protect client privacy in sensor networks, it is essential to implement privacy-enhancing technologies. Various strategies have been proposed for continuous data streams, including 

k-anonymity for data streams [6]–[8] and differential pri-vacy [9], both of which have proven effective. More recently, 

z-anonymity [10], [11] has emerged as a lightweight and memory-efficient approach that operates almost in real time by immediately deciding whether to publish or suppress each measurement. It protects privacy by withholding rare values that could enable re-identification [11]. In addition to its suggested applications in transaction data, network traffic, and location trajectories [10], [12], we see significant potential for 

> This research has been funded by the Federal Ministry of Research, Technology and Space (BMFTR, Project 16KISA034) and the European Union (NextGenerationEU).

z-anonymity in IoT networks in general, where large volumes of high-frequency data are generated. 

z-anonymity was originally designed for centralized systems in which all data is collected at a single data sink. However, given the distributed nature of sensor networks and the need to minimize trust in a central entity capable of extensive system-wide analysis, a decentralized solution is required. In this paper, we propose de Zent, a decentralized implemen-tation of z-anonymity designed for sensor networks. Our ap-proach preserves data utility while reducing trust requirements and eliminating the need for a coordinating central entity. The main contribution of de Zent is a privacy-preserving approach to distributed counting and data publication, combining secure summation with a stochastic counting structure. This design enables gateways to locally z-anonymize data without leak-ing information, making de Zent particularly suitable for the distributed and high-frequency nature of sensor networks. Our findings suggest that de Zent produces results compara-ble to centralized z-anonymity by [11] based on metrics such as message count and publication ratio. While decentraliza-tion requires additional coordination among the gateways, it reduces the overall number of messages sent to the central entity. Although the coordination process requires additional memory at the gateways, this trade-off seems acceptable given that they are system entities with greater capabilities. We thus conclude that de Zent successfully decentralizes anonymization in distributed networks, effectively reducing trust. The paper is organized as follows. We first introduce z-anonymity as the core privacy technology for de Zent followed by our system and attacker model. Sec. IV presents de Zent before we describe the privacy preserving implementation. In Sec. VI, we describe our methodology, while Sec. VII presents our evaluation results. Before concluding the paper, we discuss related work in Sec. VIII. II. z-ANONYMITY 

Due to its low memory and computational overhead, we recognize z-anonymity as an effective strategy to enhance privacy in IoT networks. z-anonymity was introduced in [10], [11] and shared on GitHub. 1 z-anonymity enables anonymity without delays when publishing data streams while preventing re-identification based on rare sensitive attributes.        

> 1https://github.com/nikhiljha95/zanonymity/blob/main/README.md
> arXiv:2603.08854v1 [cs.DC] 9 Mar 2026 CE GW 1
> GW 2
> (· · · )
> GW n−1
> GW n
> SN 2
> SN 1
> ...
> SN m
> (a) Without coordination.
> CE GW 13
> GW 2
> (· · · )
> GW n−1
> GW n
> SN 2
> SN 1
> ...
> SN m
> 24
> 1
> 5
> (b) With coordination.
> Fig. 1: System architecture of a distributed sensor network.

More precisely, z-anonymity processes one potentially iden-tifying attribute, such as a sensor value. z-anonymity operates on continuous data streams, processing each data point only once and publishing it immediately if at least z clients have reported the same value within a specified time period, ∆t.This method effectively suppresses rare values from smaller groups of users and ensures an implicit anonymity set. Each published data point also includes a timestamp and a client pseudonym. The parameters z and ∆t can be adjusted to balance data utility and privacy. As shown in [11], the output of z-anonymity is also k-anonymous with a certain probability, which depends on various parameters, including z, ∆t, and the ratio between number of users and z. Generally, the higher the value of z, the greater the probability of k-anonymous output. At present, the implementations are confined to a centralized setting. That is, z-anonymity could be applied at a central entity (CE) that can acquire significant insights about the system and its individual clients, as it can collect, and analyze all data of the system. This raises trust concerns, as the CE may draw accurate conclusions leading to the correlation of private information. As a result, implementing z-anonymity on the CE imposes high trust requirements towards the CE. III. S YSTEM MODEL 

We aim to reduce trust requirements towards a CE and to enhance privacy by implementing anonymization at local components of the distributed system. We focus on realizing de Zent for IoT networks that may contain different sensors in a distributed setup. An exemplary use case that uses such a system is smart metering of electricity consumption in district management, encompassing data from households, industry, and local businesses [13]. In the following, we describe the system model, including the distributed architecture and the capabilities of the system entities. 

A. System Architecture 

Sensor networks, such as smart metering infrastructures, primarily consist of distributed hierarchical systems, which include multiple logical layers with distinct processing and communication capabilities [13]–[15]. In Fig. 1a, we illustrate a representative system architecture for smart metering [15]. The sensor nodes (SNs) are installed on the client side and regularly measure data. These SNs have mostly limited processing and communication capabilities. Therefore, SNs are connected to a trusted gateway (GW), which serves as an intermediary step to forward data from the SNs to the CE, for example, an energy provider. To minimize complexity for SNs, tasks like measurement requests and coordination can be initiated by GWs. This further reduces power usage, for example through the use of wake-up receivers. In the exemplary smart metering use case, power consumption is not a major concern, but it is crucial for self-sufficient sensor networks that lack regular power supply. The GWs are robust system entities with greater com-putational and memory resources. They collect data from several SNs, perform additional processing steps, and most importantly, forward the data to a CE. The GWs can poten-tially use more powerful communication technologies, e.g., by implementing 5G connectivity, thereby enabling higher bandwidth and throughput. The CE serves as a data sink, centrally collecting all metered data from the system. By receiving data points from the entire system at regular intervals, the CE is capable of performing extensive analyses. The anonymization step of centralized z-anonymity (cf. Sec. II) is executed on this CE, which requires a certain degree of trust from the clients. To reduce this trust requirement, we develop de Zent to leverage the advantage of the distributed system and imple-ment z-anonymity on the GWs, such that the CE only receives anonymized data. To this end, de Zent assumes communication links between the GWs, which are organized in a ring topology as illustrated in Fig. 1b. de Zent works with clock cycles, repeating the same steps per cycle and, therefore, requires semi-synchronized clocks. The synchronization is needed to identify the current clock cycle during anonymization. Consequently, the required pre-cision correlates with the desired measurement frequency. In the exemplary use case of electricity consumption metering, data are often measured every 15 minutes [15], which requires a precision of up to 7 minutes that can be easily realized. 

B. Attacker Model 

We assume an honest-but-curious attacker (HBC) who fol-lows the protocol but attempts to infer sensitive information about clients. While stronger attacker models certainly exist, an HBC is reasonable in our use case, as smart energy metering operates in a highly regulated environment with controlled infrastructure. Extending de Zent to defend against stronger, active attackers would broaden its applicability, but would likely incur performance penalties. Therefore, our main goal with de Zent is to prevent re-identification and the inference of personal characteristics, e.g., linking consumption patterns to specific clients. We focus on protecting against a corrupt CE that can combine and analyze data from all SNs. At the same time, we seek to deploy a solu-tion that is lightweight and can be applied in sensor networks. We further assume secure communication channels between entities, which excludes eavesdroppers from our threat model. The adversary’s inference capabilities are therefore limited to the data available through protocol-compliant interaction and published outputs, not through side channels such as traffic analysis. We further assume that SNs trust their associated GW and that widespread collusion among GWs is unlikely. Under this assumption, de Zent offers probabilistic protection against colluding attackers: since neighboring GWs are se-lected pseudo-randomly when establishing the ring topology, an attacker cannot reliably position colluding GWs next to a target. We analyze the collusion probability in Sec. V-D. IV. DE ZENT - L OCAL z-ANONYMITY WITH COORDINATION 

To avoid placing trust in the CE, we aim to enforce z-anonymity at GWs, which we refer to as local z-anonymity .This approach enhances client privacy by limiting trust to local components and reducing global data visibility. However, separate GWs can only process data of their respective SNs which might reduce utility or anonymity. To address this, we develop the privacy-preserving coordination protocol de Zent, which enables local z-anonymity with minimal coordination across GWs. The coordination offered by de Zent is used primarily to perform distributed counting among the GWs and to assign responsibility for publishing anonymized tuples. Due to this coordination, data from all SNs within the system are considered during anonymization, thus ensuring a high anonymity and utility level. de Zent repeats the same steps per clock cycle. In each cycle, one GW is designated as clock cycle coordinator (CCC). To perform distributed counting and subsequent data publication, the GWs perform two communication rounds in a round-robin fashion. The resulting data flow and coordination steps in these rounds can be summarized as follows (step numbers correspond to those shown in Fig. 1b): 1) SNs measure data and send it to their associated GW. 2) In the collection round, the GWs exchange counts of each measurement along the ring. 3) The CCC (e.g., GW 1 in Fig. 1b) ensures that only values with at least z occurrences are designated for publication by deleting lower values in the counting structure. 4) In the publication round, the GWs pass the updated counting structure along the ring to designate publishing responsibilities. 5) GWs responsible for publication forward the data to the CE, which collects it for further processing. Through de Zent, the GWs can collectively enforce the same z threshold as would be achieved if z-anonymity were executed directly on the CE. In the following, we provide a detailed description of our de Zent protocol, for achieving local z-anonymity with mini-mal coordination. Accompanying pseudocode can be found in Appendix A. Additionally, we provide an implementation as part of our simulation. 2 For now, we focus on the coordination algorithm; the privacy mechanisms are discussed in Sec. V. 

1) System Setup: During setup, connections and ring topol-ogy between GWs are established autonomously. At the be-ginning of each clock cycle, a CCC is designated from the 

> 2https://github.com/carolin-brunn/deZent-local zanon

set of GWs. Several strategies can be implemented to assign the CCC. For instance, the CCC is assigned by the CE or determined based on internal ranks [16]. The CCC is responsible for managing the prerequisites for the respective cycle, as well as coordinating the data collection and publication round. To prepare the data collection, the CCC initializes a counting structure ( cnt ). The cnt needs to implement the basic functionalities to add , count , and 

remove an element. The cnt is used for distributed counting between the GWs during the collection round and designation of publication responsibility in the publication round. Once the cnt is initialized, the CCC forwards it to its successor and starts of the data collection round. 

2) Decentralized Collection Round: Upon receiving cnt ,each GW adds the counts of its data points to the cnt ,and forwards it to the succeeding GW to continue the data collection process. As in [11], each GW remembers values reported by their SNs and the number of its occurrences within ∆t. First, the GW ensures that only measurements with timestamps within ∆t are considered while older data points are deleted ( apply_delta_t() ). Next, the GW requests new measurements from its associated SNs and increases the respective counters in the cnt . Additionally, the GW stores the new records containing measured values and the corresponding SN IDs for the duration of the clock cycle because the counted values from all GWs need to be exchanged first before poten-tially publishing data points. As long as the ring has not been completely traversed the current GW forwards the updated 

cnt to its successor, which then repeats the process. When the CCC receives the cnt , the round has been completed, and all data points from GWs have been processed. 

3) Ensure minimum count ( z-anonymity): Once the collec-tion round is completed and CCC has received the updated 

cnt , it proceeds with the post-processing to prepare the data publication. First, the CCC reads cnt , and ensures that only data points meeting the required minimum count z are con-sidered for publication. To this end, it subtracts z − 1 from all the value counts, those counts lower than z − 1 are set to zero. This cleaned cnt is then used for the publication round. 

4) Decentralized Publication Round: In the publication round, the cnt is used to exchange information among GWs about whether a value has been counted at least z times during the collection round. The CCC initiates the publication round by forwarding the cleaned cnt to its successor. Upon receiving the cnt , each GW can check if the counters in the cnt are positive for the measurement values reported by its SNs during data collection. This means the value occurred more than z

times, and the GW may publish it by sending a tuple with value, ID, and timestamp to the CE. It then decrements the counter in the cnt by 1, ensuring no more occurrences are published than permitted. Last, the updated cnt is forwarded to the successor. When publication proceeds in the order defined by the sys-tem’s ring structure, a bias may arise, as the GWs immediately following the CCC are more likely to publish. To mitigate this bias, we introduce a publication probability ppub , which the CCC sets. The GWs publish a value with probability ppub ,reducing the publication bias. Since this step is probabilistic, not all values may be published after the round completes. Therefore, the CCC can initiate an additional round with 

ppub = 1 to guarantee publication of all remaining values. If the bias is acceptable, publication may be enforced in the first round, thus, omitting additional publication rounds. It is important to note that, in general, it is not necessary for the 

cnt to be empty to stop the publication round, since all values that occurred within ∆t are counted, however, only the data points of the current clock cycle are available for publication. The entire procedure is repeated in the next clock cycle with a new designated CCC. V. P RIVACY -P RESERVING AGGREGATION 

de Zent realizes z-anonymity in a distributed system by adding minimal coordination between GWs. We consider a network with a set S of SNs, and a set N = {N1, . . . , N n} of GWs arranged in a ring, where N1 is the CCC, without loss of generality. Each node Ni holds a local multiset Mi ⊆ U with measurement values of its associated {SN i}, where U ⊆ Q.The basic functionality of de Zent does not offer protection against an HBC, since the adversary can observe counts for reported measurements during data collection. To add privacy protection, we propose the combination of a stochastic 

counting structure and add a secure sum strategy. While cryptographic solutions could also provide privacy, we focus on lightweight mechanisms that remain viable for sensor networks with low-power entities and high measurement fre-quency. In line with this design goal, the stochastic cnt is a suitable choice, as it reduces the space complexity for message transmission between GWs. 

A. Stochastic Counting Structure 

Specifically, we choose a counting bloom filter (CBF) [17], [18] to represent the aggregated multiset. However, the data structure can be replaced with any solution that supports distributed counting and information exchange regarding the existence of values. Given their memory and computing ef-ficiency that seem reasonable for implementation in sensor networks, CBFs are a suitable option that we have chosen deliberately for our implementation of the protocol. A CBF is an array of counters to record the frequency of value occurrences with the help of independent hash func-tions. More precisely, a CBF is defined as a tuple CBF =

⟨m, k, b, H, C ⟩, where m ∈ N denotes the length of the counter array C ∈ Nm, and k ∈ N denotes the number of hash functions H = {h1, . . . , h k} with hj : U → { 0, . . . , m − 1}.Each counter can represent up to 2b occurrences, where b is the number of allocated bits per counter. To add an element x ∈ U , all k hash functions are evaluated, and the corresponding counters are incremented by 1: 

CBFAdd: ∀j ∈ { 1, . . . , k } : C[hj (x)] ← C[hj (x)] + 1 (1) Deletion follows the same procedure as addition, but decre-ments the corresponding counters by 1. The frequency of x

can then be estimated as: 

CBFCount: ˆf (x) = k

min  

> j=1

C[hj (x)] . (2) Due to potential hash collisions, false positives are possible, meaning counts could be greater than 0 even if the element was never added. For a given expected number of elements X, the parameters m and k can be adjusted according to the accepted false positive probability Pf p [18]: 

m = − X · ln (Pf p )(ln 2) 2 and k = m

X · ln 2 (3) The parameter estimation should be performed based on the specific use case, taking into consideration the required privacy and utility guarantees. Implementing a stochastic data structure also offers the opportunity to enhance privacy, because only the number of value occurrences needs to be shared for z-anonymity and no additional details of the data points are required. However, directly applying a CBF carries the risk of reverse-engineering measurement values from the stored counts [19]. To address this limitation, we introduce an additional layer of protection through secure summation. 

B. Secure Summation 

We propose the use of a secure sum algorithm to ensure that intermediate nodes cannot infer the exact number of occurrences during data collection. Our design builds upon the Basic Secure Sum protocol (BSS) [20], [21], which can be seamlessly integrated in de Zent. Here, a perturbation masks partial sums during aggregation, ensuring that no intermediate node learns individual contributions [22]. This is particularly important for values that occur fewer than z times and must remain private. In our design, secure sum is achieved by having N1 add a random perturbation R ∈ Nm to the initial counter array and removing it at the end. In [20], R is uniformly chosen from 

[1 , · · · , n ]. Note that, with domain knowledge, the maximum required noise may be reduced, which can further reduce the counter size b. We accordingly adapt the initialization and pub-lication preparation by having the CCC add the perturbation to all bits of the CBF during initialization and remove it again during publication preparation. 

Initialization: N1 samples Rm ∈ Nm, and initializes the 

cnt with C ← CBFAdd ({Rm}), and forwards C to N2.

Aggregation: When N2 receives C, the decentralized collection round is executed. At each Ni, with 2 ≤ i ≤ n, the node updates C by adding each element x ∈ M i to the cnt ,i.e., C ← CBFAdd (x). Finally, the updated cnt is forwarded to the next node, with Nn sending it back to N1. Due to the perturbation R, privacy protection against an HBC is provided during data collection. Finalization: Before initiating the publication phase, N1

receives the final cnt C and removes the initial perturbation R,yielding ⟨m, k, b, H, C ⟩, a CBF representing the aggregated multiset M = Sni=1 Mi. For any x ∈ U, the estimated frequency is given by ˆf (x) = CBFCount (x). Correctness of the distributed counts follows, since R cancels out in this finalization step. 

C. ID Masking 

Even though the stochastic cnt and secure sum offer pro-tection during the publication process, knowledge can still be inferred based on the published data tuples. In z-anonymity, published tuples comprise a timestamp, a measurement value, and a client ID. To avoid a direct link between IDs and client ID, [11] assign rotating pseudonyms. For de Zent, this could be implemented by using rotating pseudonyms for the GWs. Presumably, this comes at a cost to data utility; an implementation and detailed analysis are left for future work. To further strengthen privacy, the IDs of individual SNs can be replaced with the ID of their coordinating GW. This masks client identities and eliminates the need for rotating SN pseudonyms. The approach is conceptually similar to Network Address Translation [23], where multiple devices share a common identifier. The approach changes linking and tracing possibilities between clock cycles. However, the CE can still infer that each SN contributes exactly one measurement per cycle, so data utility is preserved. 

D. Privacy Analysis of de Zent 

By combining a stochastic data structure with a lightweight secure summation strategy, de Zent achieves local z-anonymity in a distributed network with minimal coordination. It provides the same output privacy as centralized z-anonymity [11], while drastically reducing the trust placed in the CE. In de Zent, the CE only learns information about data tuples that are published, since the anonymization process is only performed on the GWs. Accordingly, the CE does not receive any information about measurements that occur fewer than z times, unlike when the CE applies z-anonymity centrally, which would allow the CE to analyze information from all tuples. Currently, the CE can link messages and the sending GW since it is aware of the message origin. Potential mitigation techniques include publication via proxy, but the performance and privacy impact of this needs further analyses. As SNs can be masked by their associated GWs, we expect our approach to provide sufficient privacy for most practical use cases. When removing the perturbation R, the CCC is the only GW that is capable of identifying values that occurred fewer than z times, We therefore propose to rotate the CCC each clock cycle to reduce the capability of a single GW to correlate values across multiple clock cycles. Beyond the CCC, each GW only observes perturbed inter-mediate aggregates during secure sum and thus cannot distin-guish genuine measurements from injected noise. However, if two GWs collude and happen to be neighbors of an honest GW in the ring, they can compare the incoming and outgoing               

> TABLE I: Collusion probability patt for malicious share K
> K0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
> patt 0.009 0.04 0.09 0.16 0.25

values and thereby extract information about that GW’s values. That is, de Zent building upon BSS does not provide full collusion resistance [21], but offers probabilistic protection: in a pseudo-random ring, the probability of a successful targeted collusion attack is patt = k 

> (n−1)

· (k−1) (n−2) for k attackers among 

n nodes. Table I shows this probability of success for different shares K of k attackers among n nodes. For n = 100 GWs and k = 20 attackers, this results in patt = 0 .04 . Even for a comparatively high share of adversarial GWs, the estimated attack success probability remains low. We thus consider BSS a reasonable choice for our setting. VI. M ETHODOLOGY 

In the following, we outline our simulation methodology. We base our simulation on an exemplary smart metering use case and consider three main scenarios: centralized, fully decentralized, and de Zent. 

Simulation Data: To get a data basis, we synthetically generate energy consumption data for different client types based on publicly available standard load profiles. 3 These profiles include representative consumption patterns, e.g., for households, farms, and local businesses, each exhibiting dif-ferent usage behaviors. The profiles provide values for ev-ery 15 minutes and are normalized to a maximum annual consumption of 1,000 kWh/a. Even tough we do not aim to realize z-anonymity for electricity metering in particular, we want to utilize realistic data. We therefore scale the values to typical consumption ranges for each client type, using publicly available statistics from the Federal Statistic Office of Germany. 4 The references for the scaling values are documented in our GitHub project. Using these profiles, we model an exemplary district in Berlin, Germany. We first define a representative distribution of various client type profiles. Then, for each simulation, the type of each SN can be randomly determined based on the underlying profile distribution, and the measurement values are generated based on the corresponding standard load profile. Note that the measurement data can take arbitrary floating-point values, which can distort the anonymization. To address this, we discretize the measurements by rounding them to key values (i.e., buckets), which are then used to count occur-rences. In our simulation, the rounding level increases with larger values, under the assumption that larger measurements exhibit greater variability. 

Simulation Scenarios: For our simulation, we implement three scenarios: centralized, fully decentralized, and de Zent (i.e., decentralized with coordination). The centralized and                

> 3https://www.bdew.de/energie/standardlastprofile-strom/
> 4https://www.destatis.de/DE/Themen/Gesellschaft-Umwelt/Umwelt/UGR/ private-haushalte/Tabellen/stromverbrauch-haushalte.html 1510 25 50 100
> 0
> 0.5
> 1
> zvalue
> Publication ratio
> (a) Fully decentralized
> 1510 25 50 100
> zvalue
> (b) de Zent.
> 1510 25 50 100
> zvalue
> # GWs
> 5
> 25
> 50
> 75
> 100
> 125
> 150
> # SNs
> 20
> 100
> (c) Centralized.

Fig. 2: Average ratio of published tuples in different scenarios depending on value of z, 10 simulation runs.                                

> 525 50 75 100 125 150
> 0
> 0.5
> 1
> 1.5
> ·10 5
> Number of GWs Message count (GW-CE)
> (a) GW ↔CE.
> 525 50 75 100 125 150
> 0
> 0.5
> 1
> 1.5·10 5
> Number of GWs Message count (GW-CE)
> z
> 15
> 10 25
> 50 100
> (b) GW ↔CE.
> 525 50 75 100 125 150
> 0
> 1
> 2
> 3
> ·10 5
> Number of GWs Message count (GW-GW/SN) fully decentral de Zent central
> (c) GW ↔GW/SN.

Fig. 3: Average number of messages transmitted during simulation, 10 simulation runs. 

fully decentralized scenarios serve as reference points. In the centralized setup, z-anonymity is applied at the CE, while in the fully decentralized, each GW applies local z-anonymity without coordination, i.e., on the locally available data only. In all scenarios, the number of GWs and the maximum number of SNs connected to each GW can be adjusted. The number of SNs is drawn from a normal distribution, with the peak occurring at half of the maximum number. We also evaluate other parameters, such as the value of z and the client types. This enables us to examine how the network architecture influences the achievable level of anonymity. We validated our centralized implementation against the original implementation of z-anonymity [11]. Interested read-ers can find the results in Appendix B. VII. E VALUATION 

In the following, we present the results of our simulations and compare the three scenarios explained above, centralized, de Zent, and fully decentralized. We evaluate various metrics to estimate the costs and benefits caused by the decentralized implementation of z-anonymity with coordination. We con-ducted the simulation for z ∈ { 1, 5, 10 , 25 , 50 , 100 } and the number of GWs in {5, 25 , 50 , 75 , 100 , 125 , 150 }. We run the simulation 10 times for each set of parameters. In the majority of experiments, we observe low standard deviation, displayed with error bars. 

A. Results 1) Publication Ratio: To evaluate data utility in decentral-ized z-anonymity, we analyze the ratio of published tuples as a metric. In Fig. 2, we show the publication ratio depending on the value of z and the number of GWs in the system. We observe that the publication ratio in the centralized scenario and in de Zent is nearly identical, as depicted in Fig. 2b and 2c. This suggests that data utility for further anal-yses remains consistent across both scenarios. Additionally, we notice that the publication ratio increases with a higher number of GWs in the system each with the same number of SNs, which results in a higher total number of entities. This aligns with our expectations, as a larger number of SNs results in more value occurrences and, consequently, a greater number of data points that can be published. In contrast to a fully decentralized scenario, the benefits of the scenarios using centralized z-anonymity or de Zent become clear. Fig. 2a clearly shows that in a fully decentralized scenario the number of SNs connected to a GW is the key factor influencing the publication ratio. As the number of SNs increases, the publication ratio also rises (dashed line, star). Furthermore, the total number of entities in the system has a greater impact on the results than their distribution between GWs and SNs. This can be seen in Fig. 2b, where two different configurations with #GW s = 25 , #SN s = 20 (solid blue line) and #GW s = 5 , #SN s = 100 (dashed purple line) both result in approximately 250 entities (average #SN s corresponds to 

> #

SN s 

> 2

), show similar outcomes. To get an impression of the suitability of de Zent for po-tential sensor networks, we also analyzed the publication ratio depending on hypothetical client types in a smart metering scenario. Appendix C shows the corresponding results. 

2) Message Count: To estimate the coordination overhead, we analyze the number of messages transmitted within the system. The simulation results presented below were obtained with the maximum number of SNs set to 20. Higher numbers of system entities, e.g., #SN = 100 were not feasible due to performance constraints. Therefore, in this analysis, we vary only the number of GWs and the value of z.In Fig. 3a, we illustrate the number of messages transmitted between GWs and the CE, with each color depicting the count for one scenario, respectively. We observe that more messages are transmitted in the centralized scenario since all measured data points are forwarded to the CE. In both other scenarios only the anonymized data points are sent. Fig. 3b shows the number of messages for different values of z. We note that in de Zent more messages are sent towards the CE than in the fully decentralized scenario. This finding confirms that more data points can be published and forwarded to the CE if coordination between the GWs is added to the local anonymization process. This advantage becomes particularly apparent as the value of z increases, leading to a decrease in the number of data points published. Next, we examine the number of messages transmitted between the GWs themselves and between the GWs and the SNs. Fig. 3c shows the message count for the three scenarios. We observe that the message count is consistent in both the centralized and fully decentralized scenario. Given that the system architecture is identical across all scenarios, this aligns with our expectations. Both scenarios transmit only the messages necessary to initiate the measurement process and those required to send the measurements from the SNs to the collecting GW. Furthermore, we observe that the message count in de Zent is higher compared to the other scenarios. This increase is anticipated due to the messages required for coordination among the GWs. However, this overhead corresponds approximately to that of the centralized scenario observed in Fig. 3a. 

3) Complexity: In addition to the number of messages, the volume of transmitted data is decisive. In de Zent, the inter-GW coordination transmits a CBF. Using the standard sizing from Eq. 3 with Pf p = 0 .05 and X = 1000 inserted items yields m ≈ 6235 counters and an optimal k ≈ 4.32 hash functions. With 8-bit counters (counts up to 255), the filter size is ≈ 6.1 kB. Thus, three passes around a ring of |N | gateways entail roughly 3 |N | × 6.1 kB of coordination traffic per cycle. By contrast, in the centralized scenario measurements from all SNs in S are sent from a GW to the CE with a payload in the order of tens of bytes (application data plus network headers). Additionally, GWs need to store the measurements that associated SNs reported within ∆t. However, since GWs are system entities with more resources this seems like a reasonable assumption. 

B. Discussion 

To provide privacy guarantees while minimizing trust, de Zent requires lightweight coordination overhead. The rel-ative data volume of each scenario depends on |N | , the number of decentrally anonymized tuples |A| , and |S| . In typical deployments |N | ≪ |S| . Especially for meaningful z,when |A| ≪ |S| , the number of messages towards the CE is reduced, which makes de Zent competitive in total bytes despite a slight coordination overhead. Both, the centralized scenario and de Zent, achieve nearly identical publication rates and can provide high privacy pro-tection, reflected by large values of z. In contrast, the fully decentralized scenario can only achieve lower values of z di-rectly correlating to the number of SNs connected to each GW. Therefore, de Zent presents a feasible solution to implement z-anonymity in a decentralized system by adding coordination. As analyzed in Sec. V and shown by our results, de Zent achieves the same privacy guarantees for its published data as the centralized implementation of z-anonymity. While the exact order of tuples may differ, de Zent produces an equivalent output, which is reflected in the number and ratio of published tuples. Consequently, it achieves the same data utility and in-herits the same privacy implications also regarding the proba-bility of k-anonymous output as centralized z-anonymity [11]. At the same time, de Zent minimizes the need for trust towards a CE. Privacy risks and information leakage due to coordination between the GWs can be significantly reduced by carefully implementing noise for the CBF and reason-able pseudonymization strategies to further protect the SNs. In order to further protect de Zent against more powerful attacks, future work might explore cryptographic extensions for coordination. Since cryptography adds slight complexity, de Zent might be more feasible for certain use cases due to its lightweight characteristics. Depending on the exact use case and system capabilities, users could then choose between different versions of the protocol. In summary, by implementing minimal coordination within the system, the GWs can protect the privacy of their clients in a distributed environment, assuming they adhere to an honest-but-curious attacker model toward other GWs and the CE. VIII. R ELATED WORK 

Several approaches address the challenge of anonymizing continuous data streams, for instance by providing differen-tial privacy [9], [24]. However, local differential privacy is not suitable for our use case and is more appropriate for aggregated statistics due to the noise it introduces, which affects utility. Additionally, k-anonymity guarantees have been investigated for data streams, such as CASTLE [6], [25] and its enhancements [26]–[28]. k-anonymity has also been applied in Big Data contexts [29], [30], however, focusing primarily on efficient anonymization via parallelization in centralized systems. Most existing work addresses either continuous data streams [31], [32] or the distributed architectures [33], [34]. However, integrating both aspects is essential to advance anonymity in distributed sensor networks [35], [36]. Research on lightweight privacy-preserving distributed counting is particularly relevant to realize decentraliza-tion [22], [37], [38]. Furthermore, multiparty computation and cryptography methods are frequently investigated as potential solutions [39]–[43]. Especially in the context of smart grid, this topic has gained attention. [44]–[46] propose solutions to integrate secure sum and multiparty computation for smart grid. However, these approaches involve cryptography or com-putationally intensive processing that may not be feasible for resource-constrained sensor networks. IX. C ONCLUSION 

In this paper, we analyzed the feasibility of implementing z-anonymity in a decentralized manner, enabling its application in distributed systems such as IoT networks. To this end, we introduce de Zent as a mechanism for local z-anonymity with minimal coordination among GWs. This mechanism allows the deployment of z-anonymity independently of a CE, relying instead on data exchange and coordination between GWs. Our results indicate that the same level of privacy can be achieved with this distributed approach. Furthermore, de Zent provides enhanced privacy guarantees, as the CE is no longer privy to all measurements without filtering. Future research is required to determine the optimal parameter settings for specific use cases and to explore extensions that protect against stronger at-tackers. In summary, de Zent constitutes a lightweight solution for anonymization in sensor networks achieving privacy and utility comparable to the centralized solution while reducing trust requirements. REFERENCES [1] F. Alshohoumi, M. Sarrab, A. Al-Hamdani, and D. Al-Abri, “Systematic review of existing iot architectures security and privacy issues and concerns,” IJACSA , vol. 10, 2019. [2] F. Pallas, J. Legler, N. Amslgruber, and E. Gr¨ unewald, “Redcastle: practically applicable ks -anonymity for iot streaming data at the edge in node-red,” in Proc. of M4IoT@Middleware , 2021. [3] J. Carmody, S. Shringarpure, and G. V. de Venter, “AI and privacy concerns: a smart meter case study,” J. Inf. Commun. Ethics Soc. , vol. 19, no. 4, 2021. [4] S. Finster and I. Baumgart, “Privacy-aware smart metering: A survey,” 

IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutorials , vol. 17, no. 2, 2015. [5] P. Schirmer, I. Mporas, and A. Sheikh Akbari, “Identification of TV channel watching from smart meter data using energy disaggregation,” 

Energies , vol. 14, no. 9, 2021. [6] J. Cao, B. Carminati, E. Ferrari, and K. Tan, “CASTLE: continuously anonymizing data streams,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secur. Comput. ,vol. 8, no. 3, 2011. [7] L. Sweeney, “k-anonymity: A model for protecting privacy,” Int. J. Uncertain. Fuzziness Knowl. Based Syst. , vol. 10, no. 5, 2002. [8] P. Samarati, “Protecting respondents’ identities in microdata release,” 

IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. , vol. 13, no. 6, 2001. [9] C. Dwork, “Differential privacy in new settings,” in SODA . SIAM, 2010. [10] N. Jha, T. Favale, L. Vassio, M. Trevisan, and M. Mellia, “z-anonymity: Zero-delay anonymization for data streams,” in IEEE BigData , 2020. [11] N. Jha, L. Vassio, M. Trevisan, E. Leonardi, and M. Mellia, “Practical anonymization for data streams: z-anonymity and relation with k-anonymity,” Perform. Evaluation , vol. 159, 2023. [12] B. Sedlak, I. Murturi, and S. Dustdar, “Specification and operation of privacy models for data streams on the edge,” in ICFEC . IEEE, 2022. [13] G. R. Barai, S. Krishnan, and B. Venkatesh, “Smart metering and functionalities of smart meters in smart grid - a review,” in IEEE EPEC ,2015. [14] R. Bikmetov, M. Y. Raja, K. Kazi, B. Chowdhury, and J. Enslin, “Dynamic prediction capabilities of smart metering infrastructure,” in 

NAPS , 2015. [15] M. H. Raza, Y. M. Rind, I. Javed, M. Zubair, M. Q. Mehmood, and Y. Massoud, “Smart meters for smart energy: A review of business intelligence applications,” IEEE Access , vol. 11, 2023. [16] B. Sidik, R. Puzis, P. Zilberman, and Y. Elovici, “PALE: time bounded practical agile leader election,” IEEE Trans. Parallel Distributed Syst. ,vol. 31, no. 2, 2020. [17] L. Fan, P. Cao, J. M. Almeida, and A. Z. Broder, “Summary cache: a scalable wide-area web cache sharing protocol,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw. , vol. 8, no. 3, 2000. [18] A. Gakhov, Probabilistic Data Structures and Algorithms for Big Data Applications , Feb. 2019. [19] P. Reviriego, A. S´ anchez-Maci´ an, S. Walzer, E. M. G´ omez, S. Liu, and F. Lombardi, “On the privacy of counting bloom filters,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secur. Comput. , vol. 20, no. 2, 2023. [20] C. Clifton, M. Kantarcioglu, J. Vaidya, X. Lin, and M. Y. Zhu, “Tools for privacy preserving distributed data mining,” ACM SIGKDD Explor. Newsl. , vol. 4, no. 2, 2002. [21] T. Ranbaduge, D. Vatsalan, and P. Christen, “Secure multi-party summa-tion protocols: Are they secure enough under collusion?” Trans. Data Priv. , vol. 13, no. 1, 2020. [22] F. Tschorsch and B. Scheuermann, “An algorithm for privacy-preserving distributed user statistics,” Computer Networks , vol. 57, no. 14, 2013. [23] K. B. Egevang and P. Srisuresh, “Traditional IP Network Address Translator (Traditional NAT),” RFC 3022, Jan. 2001. [Online]. Available: https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3022 [24] ´U. Erlingsson, V. Pihur, and A. Korolova, “RAPPOR: randomized aggregatable privacy-preserving ordinal response,” in CCS . ACM, 2014. [25] C. Brunn, S. N. n. von Voigt, and F. Tschorsch, “Analyzing continuous ks-anonymization for smart meter data,” in ESORICS Workshops (1) ,ser. LNCS, vol. 14398, 2023. [26] K. Guo and Q. Zhang, “Fast clustering-based anonymization approaches with time constraints for data streams,” Knowl. Based Syst. , vol. 46, 2013. [27] M. A. Mohamed, S. M. Ghanem, and M. H. Nagi, “Privacy-preserving for distributed data streams: towards l-diversity,” Int. Arab J. Inf. Technol. , vol. 17, no. 1, 2020. [28] L. Yang, X. Chen, Y. Luo, X. Lan, and W. Wang, “Idea: A utility-enhanced approach to incomplete data stream anonymization,” Tsinghua Sci. Technol. , vol. 27, no. 1, 2022. [29] S. D. C. di Vimercati, D. Facchinetti, S. Foresti, G. Livraga, G. Oldani, S. Paraboschi, M. Rossi, and P. Samarati, “Scalable distributed data anonymization for large datasets,” IEEE Trans. Big Data , vol. 9, no. 3, 2023. [30] E. Shamsinejad, T. Banirostam, M. M. Pedram, and A. M. Rahmani, “Representing a model for the anonymization of big data stream using in-memory processing,” Ann. Data Sci. , vol. 12, 2025. [31] J. Domingo-Ferrer, J. Soria-Comas, and R. Mulero-Vellido, “Steered microaggregation as a unified primitive to anonymize data sets and data streams,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur. , vol. 14, no. 12, 2019. [32] J. A. Onesimu, J. Karthikeyan, and Y. Sei, “An efficient clustering-based anonymization scheme for privacy-preserving data collection in iot based healthcare services,” Peer-to-Peer Netw. Appl. , vol. 14, no. 3, 2021. [33] T. Tassa and D. J. Cohen, “Anonymization of centralized and distributed social networks by sequential clustering,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. , vol. 25, no. 2, 2013. [34] F. Kohlmayer, F. Prasser, C. Eckert, and K. A. Kuhn, “A flexible approach to distributed data anonymization,” J. Biomed. Informatics ,vol. 50, 2014. [35] M. Stegelmann and D. Kesdogan, “GridPriv: A smart metering archi-tecture offering k-anonymity,” in IEEE TrustCom , 2012. [36] K. Lee, D. Kim, D. Ha, U. Rajput, and H. Oh, “On security and privacy issues of fog computing supported internet of things environment,” in 

IEEE NoF , 2015. [37] V. G. Ashok and R. Mukkamala, “A scalable and efficient privacy preserving global itemset support approximation using bloom filters,” in DBSec , ser. LNCS, vol. 8566, 2014. [38] S. N. von Voigt and F. Tschorsch, “RRTxFM: Probabilistic counting for differentially private statistics,” in IFIP AICT , vol. 573, 2019. [39] H. Goyal and S. Saha, “Multi-party computation in IoT for privacy-preservation,” in IEEE ICDCS , 2022. [40] R. Lu, X. Liang, X. Li, X. Lin, and X. Shen, “EPPA: an efficient and privacy-preserving aggregation scheme for secure smart grid communi-cations,” IEEE Trans. Parallel Distributed Syst. , vol. 23, no. 9, 2012. [41] L. Ma, B. Duan, B. Zhang, Y. Li, Y. Fu, and D. Ma, “A trusted IoT data sharing method based on secure multi-party computation,” J. Cloud Comput. , vol. 13, no. 1, 2024. [42] J. S. Resende, L. Magalh˜ aes, A. Brand˜ ao, R. Martins, and L. Antunes, “Towards a modular on-premise approach for data sharing,” Sensors ,vol. 21, no. 17, 2021. [43] S. E. V. S. Pillai and K. Polimetla, “Enhancing network privacy through secure multi-party computation in cloud environments,” in IEEE ICICACS , 2024. [44] M. A. Rahman, M. H. Manshaei, E. Al-Shaer, and M. Shehab, “Secure and private data aggregation for energy consumption scheduling in smart grids,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secur. Comput. , vol. 14, no. 2, 2017. [45] M. A. Mustafa, S. Cleemput, A. Aly, and A. Abidin, “A secure and privacy-preserving protocol for smart metering operational data collection,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid , vol. 10, no. 6, 2019. [46] H. M. Khan, A. Khan, F. Jabeen, A. Anjum, and G. Jeon, “Fog-enabled secure multiparty computation based aggregation scheme in smart grid,” 

Comput. Electr. Eng. , vol. 94, 2021. 

APPENDIX 

A. de Zent– Pseudocode 

Algorithm 1 Local z-anonymity with coordination 

Require: Distributed network with semi-synchronized clocks in which GWs are interconnected in a ring architecture and collect measurements from their associated SNs 

Ensure: A joint z-anonymized data stream that can be published by the CE 1: At each clock cycle: 

2: t ← current synchronized timestamp 3: CCC ← designate a coordinating GW 4: At CCC: 

5: cnt ← initialize_cnt_struct() 

6: COLLECTION ROUND (cnt, t ) at CCC .successor 

7: PREPARE DATA PUBLICATION (cnt, z )8: ppub ← random initial publication probability 9: PUBLICATION ROUND (cnt, p pub , t ) at CCC .successor 

10: def COLLECTION ROUND (cnt, t )              

> /* delete counts that occurred longer than ∆tago but keep entries within time window */

11: apply_delta_t (GW i.cnt log, t )      

> /* request and process new measurements */

12: new m ← GW i.{SN i}.get_current_measurement() 

13: GW i.current m ← new m 

14: GW i.cnt log ← add (new m )15: cnt ← add (new m )16: if GW i = CCC then // ring has been completed 

17: return cnt 

18: else 

19: COLLECTION ROUND (cnt, t ) at GW i+1 

20: def PREPARE DATA PUBLICATION (cnt, z )          

> /* retain only value counts that are at least z*/

21: cnt ← get_final_cnt_struct() 

22: ensure_minimum_count (cnt, z )23: return cnt 

24: def PUBLICATION ROUND (cnt , ppub , t)       

> /* publish z-anonymous tuple and update cnt
> accordingly */

25: cnt ← PUBLISH TUPLES (cnt, p pub , t )26: if GW i = CCC then // ring has been completed 

27: if cnt is empty or ppub == 1 then 

28: return 

29: PUBLICATION ROUND (cnt, p pub ← 1, t ) at GW i+1 

30: def PUBLISH TUPLES (cnt, p pub , t )31: for all (x, id ) ∈ GW i.current m do 

32: if cnt .count (x) > 0 then // x is z-anonymous 

33: With ppub :

34: send ( x, id , t) to CE // publish tuple 

35: cnt .remove (m)36: return cnt 

In the following, we show the pseudocode for the de Zent al-gorithm as described in Se. IV and V. The algorithm covers the main functionalities described above as well as implementation details for the realization of privacy guarantees, for instance, the implementation with ppub (line 33). The two functions to process cnt (line 5 and 21) refer to the privacy-preserving realization of cnt such as adding (removing) noise for secure sum. The exact steps of these functions depend on the chosen counting structure and required privacy guarantees. 

B. Model validation 

1 5 10 25 50 100 

0

0.1

0.2

z value 

> Average difference of publication ratio

5

25 

50 

75 

100 

125 

150 

# GWs 

(a) Average difference of publication ratio, 10 runs. 

0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 

1,100 

1,200 

1,300 

1,400 

Relative time Number of published tuples Jha cent deZent 

(b) Publication over time for z = 50, GW = 150, 1 run. 

Fig. 4: Simulation results comparing the centralized scenario with our implementation and with that by [11]. 

As mentioned above, we validated that our implementation meets z-anonymity guarantees that are comparable to the original implementation by [11]. To this end, we compared the output generated by [11] with our simulation of a centralized scenario. Due to implementation details, the exact tuples that are published might vary between the two implementations. For instance, while [11] processes incoming tuples sequentially, de Zent first aggregates counts of all existing values in a distributed manner before publishing. However, the overall trend remains consistent. For the trivial case z = 1, we confirmed that all measurement values were published in both implementations. Fig. 4a presents the difference in publication ratios be-tween the two implementations. Both implementations pro-duce nearly identical numbers of published measurements with only minor differences due to boundary effects of the imple-mentation of window ∆t. The difference is largest in scenarios 1 5 10 25        

> 0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1
> zvalue
> Publication ratio
> (a) # GW = 5
> 1510 25 50 100

p

p       

> zvalue
> (b) # GW = 75
> 1510 25 50 100

p

p p 

> zvalue 1p household 2p household 3p household 4p household store restaurant workshop hair dresser

p bakery   

> (c) # GW = 150
> Fig. 5: Ratio of published tuples in de Zent depending on client type, 10 simulation runs.

where only a few tuples can be published, particularly for larger z values compared to smaller networks, for example, 

z = 50 for 25 GWs with an average of 10 SNs. In such scenarios, boundary effects appear to accumulate. However, for larger networks, the difference remains minimal. Apart from that, we verified that not only did the publication ratios align, but the same number of tuples were published for each measurement bucket. The results are reproducible using the code available in our GitHub repository. We also verified that the timing of the publication history aligns between the two implementations. Fig. 4b depicts the corresponding data. Further validations consistently confirmed comparable results, indicating that both published nearly identical data points. Additional analyses are available in our GitHub. Overall, this supports the conclusion that we effectively realize z-anonymity. 

C. Further Evaluation Results 

To get an impression of the suitability of de Zent for poten-tial sensor networks, we additionally analyzed the publication ratio depending on hypothetical client types in a smart meter-ing scenario. This allows us to estimate wether de Zent could be applied in scenarios with system entities that exhibit very different behaviors as it is the case in many sensor networks. Fig. 5 shows the results for three simulations in which we set the number of GWs to 5, 75 , and 150 , and the maximum number of SNs to 20 . As anticipated, the publication ratio for a small network with 5 GWs decreases significantly even at small values of z, as shown in Fig. 5a. In addition, the standard deviation is highest in this scenario, presumably, because the ratio of published tuples varies significantly and depends on the exact network configuration. In comparison, Fig. 5b and 5c show that in a larger network, data points can be published for nearly all client types. The trend associated with increasing z

is particularly noteworthy. For instance, the publication ratio of workshops (see dashed turquoise line) does not decline further after an initial sharp drop. Given the profile distribution indicating a scarcity of workshops in the network ( < 0.01% ), this suggests that workshop data points can be published since they share consumption values with other entities in the system. The consumption values for workshops resemble those of 3- and 4-person households, indicating a mutual dependency that facilitates the publication of the respective values. Meanwhile, measurement values for client types with unusual measurements are not published as z increases. To take advantage of this situation, one could consider using z-anonymity as a private filter.