Title: Contrastive Privacy: A Semantic Approach to Measuring Privacy of AI-based Sanitization

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.02977v1

Published Time: Wed, 06 May 2026 00:06:21 GMT

Number of Pages: 21

Markdown Content:
# Contrastive Privacy: A Semantic Approach to Measuring Privacy of AI-based Sanitization 

# George Bissias Eugene Bagdasarian Brian Neil Levine 

# University of Massachusetts Amherst 

{gbiss, eugene, brian}@cs.umass.edu 

# Abstract 

To sanitize specific concepts from imagery and text, privacy mechanisms with formal guarantees are often eschewed in practice in favor of more intuitive techniques. AI-based saniti-zation is poised to grow in popularity because it can work with the semantics of natural language concepts; e.g., a prompt to “remove faces, clothing, and body shape”. Many approaches exist commercially and as prior work. But, the evaluation of such approaches has been bespoke and without formal guar-antees. To fill this gap, we propose contrastive privacy 1, a formal definition of privacy that provides a systematic and quantita-tive test of sanitized media that has a semantic interpretation. It is independent of the model and mechanism used and op-erates across multiple media modalities. Contrastive privacy provides guarantees under ideal conditions; and we show how to operationalize the definition with imperfect measures of semantics, provided by models like CLIP, that can connect concepts latently. Notably, the algorithm contrasts sanitized media with other images from the same corpus to arrive at a determination; no manual labeling is involved. In our experiments, we apply our privacy test to both im-ages and text using frontier models: some generate concepts to sanitize and others perform the sanitization. With our test we quantify sanitization success across 34 combinations of models on images, and for 15 models on text. The approach not only quantifies success overall, it identifies specific fail-ures from a sanitized corpus. Further, it is independent of the mechanism used for sanitization, whether by darkening pixels, blurring, or applying more advanced means of obfuscation. 

# 1 Introduction 

Public releases of data are commonplace in many forms, in-cluding court documents, military and law enforcement disclo-sures, acts of Congress, Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests, and even social media posts. Also common are failed attempts to privatize these data by way of partial redac-tion [ 6 , 15 , 37 ]. A typical workflow for releasing data involves humans, sometimes professionally trained, poring through me-dia files, redacting sensitive information, and then releasing           

> 1https://umass-forensics.github.io/contrastive-privacy
> 0.10.20.30.40.50.6
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1
> iGPT15/OPS46
> iGPT15/Manual
> iGEM31f
> FLX2p/Manual FLX2d
> Contrastive Privacy Resolution (lower is better)
> Utility (higher is better)
> 0.10.20.30.4
> 0.6
> 0.7
> 0.8
> 0.9
> GPT4om
> GPT4o
> GPT54
> GEM2f Haiku-4.5
> Contrastive Privacy Resolution (lower is better)
> Utility (higher is better)

Figure 1: Contrastive privacy versus utility (as similarity) for a variety of mechanisms sanitizing: (top) the identity of the fast food restaurant from 49 images; (bottom) the movie discussed in the passage from 49 text passages. Pareto dominant mechanisms have square markers. (Note the different axes for each figure.) the remainder. This task is both tedious and delicate; privacy can be easily compromised through phenomena like the soft biometrics attack [ 20 ], whereby secondary evidence allows an agent with ancillary knowledge to deanonymize a subject, such as through posture, body shape, or clothing. When the 1

> arXiv:2605.02977v1 [cs.CR] 3 May 2026

size of the released data is vast, it becomes impractical for hu-mans to enforce strict privacy guidelines. As a result, reports of privacy failures appear frequently in news stories. A common approach to privacy in the academic literature is to apply techniques from differential privacy, adapted to un-structured data. Yet, in practice, differential privacy is applied infrequently. Indeed prior work has noted the shortcomings of such approaches [ 14 , 21 , 34 , 53 ]. Many have turned instead to machine-assisted privatization using large language mod-els (LLMs) and vision language models (VLMs) [ 42 ]. LLMs and VLMs are now able to “reason” about privacy vulnera-bilities in vast corpora of text, images, and to a more limited extent, video and audio. A set of works introduce what we call semantic sanitization mechanisms (SSMs), which are pri-vacy mechanisms that operate at a semantic level, identifying specific objects and concepts within a dataset that should be removed in order to preserve privacy [13, 16, 22, 42, 59]. Semantic sanitization is appealing because it naturally aligns with privacy as required by law or policy (unlike ap-proaches such as DP). For example, the Seattle police depart-ment redacts from police-worn body cameras “any identifying marks, including faces, clothes, tattoos, addresses, photos, pa-perwork, computer screens, names, etc.” [ 54 ]. And the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) lists 16 types of patient identifiers that should be removed before releasing patient data [ 58 ]. As AI models become increas-ingly capable, we anticipate a proliferation of SSMs in the near future. A critical limitation of SSMs is that there currently ex-ists no comprehensive, quantitative, and automated method to measure the privacy that they achieve. The primary chal-lenge is that these mechanisms are as complex as the large models that underlie them, making a statistical model of their privatizing behavior elusive. Recent work [ 1, 22 , 22 , 45 ] in-troduces systems for evaluating the privacy of SSMs, but only in a limited fashion. To date, all available measures of privacy either rely on cumbersome and error-prone hand-labeling of ground truth data or are derived from arbitrary collections of privacy-suggestive metrics such as anomaly detectors. 

Contributions. In this paper, we introduce contrastive pri-vacy , a privacy definition that admits an empirical and largely automated test for quantifying the privacy of a dataset of ren-derings — i.e., documents that capture semantically rich con-cepts — with respect to a well-defined abstract privacy con-cept after they have been altered by an SSM. In particular, the method measures the privacy provided by an SSM act-ing on a chosen set of concrete concepts (e.g., face, logo, title) within a representative dataset of renderings that capture a privacy concept (e.g., the person in the image or the movie discussed in the passage ). Our method relies on a provided distance mechanism that captures the semantic sim-ilarity between two renderings. Candidates for sanitization mechanisms are LLMs for text and image generation models for images. Models like SBERT and CLIP are candidates for distance mechanisms in text and images. We stress that contrastive privacy is neither limited to text and image modalities, nor is it limited to machine learning models for its mechanisms. Moreover, despite its theoretical underpinnings, our privacy test can readily be applied to real-world privacy problems, which we demonstrate empirically in Section 5. In fact, we develop an efficient algorithm for computing our privacy measure under the assumption of a commonly used family of distance mechanisms. We prove formally that the test defined by contrastive pri-vacy offers a comprehensive measure of privacy in SSM san-itized renderings, and it is capable of guaranteeing privacy to the extent that (1) all concrete concepts semantically re-lated to the privacy concept are captured by the dataset and (2) the mechanisms used to implement the test are sensitive to similarities between concepts related to the privacy con-cept. While such conditions cannot typically be guaranteed in practice, the theoretical foundation defines a privacy stan-dard that approaches a privacy guarantee in the limit that the two conditions are met. We feel that these limitations reflect the real-world limitations of both privacy engineers and adversaries who operates with limited knowledge and computational resources. We also demonstrate empirically that the most obvious approaches to constructing SSMs fail to fully achieve privacy by our definition in practice. For example, Figure 1 shows the contrastive privacy resolution, our measure of privacy, for various frontier models tasked with privatizing image and text corpora; none achieve the best possible privacy by our definition (resolution 0). Furthermore, we show that some tasks, such as privatizing the identity of a celebrity in an image, are easier than other tasks such as privatizing a global brand like McDonald’s in an image or a movie franchise such as the Avengers in text. Finally, when privacy does fail, we show how to interpret the extent of the failure in terms of the semantic similarity between common concepts. 

# 2 Preliminaries 

In this section, we introduce definitions and vocabulary that assist us in defining the problem and the contrastive privacy ap-proach. A rendering is any representation of something from the real world. For example, a rendering could be an image, a text description, a video, an audio clip, or other modality . Let 

X be the set of all possible renderings of a given modality and 

P denote the set of all possible real-world properties latent in X.2 When we say that a rendering captures a property we mean that it is possible to algorithmically infer the property from the rendering. For P ⊆ P we denote by X(P) the set of renderings that capture P. A concept c ⊆ P is any collection of properties, and an instance of c is any subset of properties in c. By I (c) we indicate the exhaustive, but not necessarily disjoint, set of instances comprising c.For example, the concept c, smurf , is a collection of proper-ties { blue skin , red hat , white beard , . . . }. And e, papa smurf , is a specific instance, a subset of c and an element of        

> 2The set Xcould indeed be extremely large. For example, the cardinality of the set of all 800x600 images with 24-bit pixels is 24 48 ×10 4
> . Thus, we acknowledge upfront that it will typically be impossible to work with Xin its entirety.

2I(c), which may be captured by a rendering. We differentiate between natural and abstract instances. A natural instance is any instance whose properties are com-putationally efficient to enumerate, such as those properties describing the face of papa smurf . An abstract instance is one whose properties cannot be efficiently identified with computational methods. For example, the instance anything that can be used to identify papa smurf is abstract. These properties could include his physical characteristics as well as the characteristics of his smurf hut or merely the presence of other smurfs. Natural and abstract concepts are concepts that comprise natural and abstract instances, respec-tively. 

# 2.1 Threat Model 

In this paper, we seek to keep private from an adversary a specific abstract instance captured within a set of renderings. The adversary has access to only renderings that we have sanitized. To express this formally, let e be an abstract instance that we seek to sanitize from a set of renderings X. Let γ ⊆ P

be a set of natural and abstract properties such that instance 

e ∈ I (γ). To sanitize e from renderings in a set X, we are limited to obfuscating computationally identifiable concepts 

c ⊆ P, and we seek to establish that c is sufficient to cover γ,i.e., γ ⊆ c. The goal of the adversary is to learn what e is from only the sanitized set of renderings. 

# 2.2 Assumptions 

In the sequel, we make the following fundamental assump-tions. 1. Efficiency. There exist computationally efficient mecha-nisms for: (a) identifying and representing the set of properties that comprise a natural instance; (b) identifying and removing instance e or replacing 

e by instance e′, transforming rendering x into x′;and (c) calculating semantic similarity between renderings. 2. Inefficiency. Generally, there exists no computationally efficient mechanism enumerating properties comprising an abstract concept or instance of that concept. 3. Representability. Corresponding to every property p ∈

P there exists a rendering in X that captures p.

# 3 Contrastive Privacy Formulation 3.1 Privacy for Complex Data 

Ensuring the privacy of unstructured information is a complex problem. In this paper, we ground our definition of privacy with respect to appropriate information flows following Con-textual Integrity (CI) [ 43 ]. CI postulates that an appropriate information flow conforms with contextual norms — differing between each context and defined through parameters: subject ,

sender , recipient , information type , and transmission principle .As the contextual norm is captured, it can then be evaluated for appropriateness. This evaluation is usually straightforward, once all parameters are accurately identified. CI clearly cap-tures, for example, an information flow of sharing an image (information type) of a given individual (subject) by the police (sender) with the public (receiver) as prescribed by a court of law (transmission principle). However, in an unstructured setting, a single rendering might capture a vast number of appropriate information flows. It could contain ancillary information (other individuals or objects) that might not be appropriate to be shared, i.e., to pre-serve victim’s identity, or some other PII. Therefore, privacy measures that focus on a single appropriate information flow are inadequate. What is needed is a privacy measure capable of comprehensively considering all such information flows. Our answer to this problem is contrastive privacy .

# 3.2 Problem Formulation 

Next, we define privacy for SSMs and prove the definition captures our requirement for sanitized concepts c to cover abstract privacy target γ. We quantify the efficacy of a saniti-zation with a single privacy resolution parameter δ, 0 ≤ δ ≤ 1,where δ = 0 when sanitization is completely successful. 

Definition 1. A distance mechanism D(x, y) is a determin-istic algorithm that accepts renderings x, y ∈ X and returns a distance with respect to their semantic similarity. It has the following properties. • Symmetry: ∀x, y ∈ X, D(x, y) = D(y, x).• Proximity: ∀x ∈ X, D(x, x) = 0. • Positivity: ∀x, y ∈ X, x̸ = y, D(x, y) > 0. 

Definition 2. Privacy mechanism , X : 2 P × X → X, is any deterministic algorithm that takes a subset of properties and a rendering and returns a modified rendering. When first argument γ ⊆ P is fixed, we write Xγ.

Definition 3. For any γ ⊆ P, X is a γ-privacy mechanism ,if Xγ sanitizes from x ∈ X every instance e ∈ I (γ); e can be obfuscated, or replaced with another instance e′̸ ∈ I (γ). In either case, we assume that Xγ(Xγ(x)) = Xγ(x).When the renderings X are images, sanitizing could be as simple as replacing concepts c (e.g., a face) with black pix-els. Or it can be as complex as a mechanism that provides differential privacy for those concepts [ 62 ]. If γ is an abstract concept, then Xγ(x) will generally not be computable (accord-ing to our Inefficiency Assumption). Nevertheless, the results in this section allow us to reason about Xγ(x) without directly computing it. 

Definition 4. We say a rendering x ∈ X captures arbitrary concept γ ⊆ P, denoted x ∈ X(γ), if x̸ = Xγ(x).3Definition 5 (Privacy of x with respect to γ). For any con-cept γ ⊆ P, rendering x ∈ X is private with respect to γ

provided that x̸ ∈ X(γ), i.e., provided that x = Xγ(x).In other words, if sanitizing a concept from an image x does not produce the same image, then the concept is captured in the original image. With there generally being no efficient way to compute 

γ, how can we actually test if x = Xγ(x), i.e., if x is private with respect to γ? The remainder of this section answers this question by reasoning about the relationship between concepts 

c that we can compute and concepts γ that we cannot. 

Definition 6. Sets of properties c, d ∈ P are said to be se-mantically connected by X and D, denoted c ∼ d, if for each 

x ∈ X(c) and y ∈ X(d),

## D(x, y) + δ < D(Xc(x), y), (1) and 

## D(x, y) + δ < D(x, Xd (y)) , (2) whenever Xc(x)̸ = y and x̸ = Xd (y).See Appendix B for illustrative examples comparing or-anges, apples, and iPhones. The intuition behind Definition 6 is that renderings x and y are more similar when concepts 

c and d are both included than when one is omitted. This implies that there is some semantic similarity between them. 

Definition 7. For any privacy and distance mechanisms X

and D and properties P ⊆ P, the semantic closure of P with respect to X and D, denoted cl (X , D, P), is the set of all properties that are semantically connected to P. Specifically, 

cl (X , D, P) = {q ∈ P : P ∼ { q})}. (3) From our definitions, we can test the efficacy of a computa-tionally efficient c-privacy mechanism that we use to privatize concepts γ. We define this as contrastive privacy , and apply the test throughout the remainder of this paper. 

Definition 8 (Contrastive privacy of Xc with respect to 

γ). Let γ be any concept and c a natural concept such that γ ⊆ cl (X , D, c). We say that c-privacy mechanism 

## Xc offers contrastive privacy with respect to γ provided that ∀x, y ∈ X(γ ∩ c),

## D(Xc(x), y) + δ > D(Xc(x), Xc(y)) . (4) In cases where δ is not fixed, if Inequality 4 holds for some 

δ ≥ 0 we say that Xc offers contrastive privacy with respect to γ at resolution δ; resolution 0 is ideal. Note that Definition 8 is a general statement about the privacy that can be achieved by removing c from X; contrast it to Definition 5, which is a statement about what is revealed from γ by a specific rendering x ∈ X.Definition 8 is powerful because it determines whether the privacy mechanism succeeded, i.e. achieved privacy at a sufficiently low resolution, based on examination of the  

> (a) Example success.
> (b) Example failure. In the sanitized image,

Xc(x), a celebrity’s face is retained. 

Figure 2: Contrastive privacy measures success via In-equality 4, D(Xc(x), y) + δ > D(Xc(x), Xc(y)) . (red/blue for clarity.) For sanitizing the concept of celebrities (dis-tance via EVA-CLIP-18B ), the privacy test detects: (a) suc-cess for iGEM31f (at resolution δ = 0 ); and (b) failure for 

FLX2d/GEM31p (at resolution δ = 0.11). original and sanitized renderings alone. It draws a conclusion about privacy with respect to γ without knowing the details of the contents of γ. It relies only on the much weaker assumption that everything in γ is semantically connected to c.

# 3.3 Application to CLIP / Cosine Similarity 

To demonstrate the applicability of contrastive privacy, we ap-ply it here to CLIP as a concrete example. For each rendering 

x ∈ X, let E(x) denote an embedding of x in a space that uses 4cosine similarity as its metric. (N.b., this example also suits other embedding models that use the same metric.) 

Example 1. We define 

## D(x, y) ≡ 1 − cos (E(x), E(y)) . (5) In this context, we have the following equivalent expres-sions. 

## D(Xc(x), y) + δ > D(Xc(x), Xc(y)) 

1−E(Xc(x)) · E(y) + δ > 1−E(Xc(x)) ·E(Xc(y)) 

## E(Xc(x)) · E(y) < E(Xc(x)) · E(Xc(y)) + δ

## E(Xc(x)) ·  E(y) − E(Xc(y))  < δ

(6) Vector E(y) − E(Xc(y)) can be interpreted as encoding the semantics of the portion of c captured by y. Thus, the cosine similarity between E(Xc(x)) and E(y) − E(Xc(y)) can be thought of as the bias of the sanitized version of x in the direction of c. When the bias is less than δ for every possible 

y, we conclude that Xc(x) fails to encode the semantics of c.Figure 2 illustrates how contrastive privacy is tested when sanitizing the concept of c = celebrities with two dif-ferent SSMs and using the EVA CLIP distance mechanism. (Each is discussed in detail in Section 5.1.) Figure 2a shows a case where Inequality 4 holds with δ = 0 ; in contrast, Figure 2b shows a case where it does not. In each case, the inequality is testing if the sanitized image on the left, 

## Xc(x), offers contrastive privacy with respect to the concepts removed by the sanitized image on the right, Xc(y).

# 3.4 Sufficiency of c to privatize γ

The intuition behind contrastive privacy is as follows. It’s clear that the only properties that differ between y and Xc(y)

are those in concept c, since the former obfuscates c from the latter. So any properties captured by Xc(x) that are absent from 

## Xc(y) and that bring Xc(x) closer to y must be in the semantic closure of c. Conversely, if Xc(x) is always farther from y than it is from Xc(y), then there could remain no properties from the semantic closure of c in Xc(x). But we assume γ is in the semantic closure of c, so there could remain no properties from γ in Xc(x). The following results make this intuition formal. 

Lemma 1. Let concepts c, d ⊆ P be such that c ∩ d̸ = /0. If x ∈ X(c ∩ d) and Xc(x) ∈ X(d), then there exists a property q ∈ d\c such that 

## X{q}(x) ∈ X(c), (7) 

and 

## Xc(x) ∈ X({q}). (8) 

Proof. By Definition 4 we know that Xc(x) ∈ X(d) means that 

## Xc(x)̸ = Xc(Xd (x)) . So, there must be some property q ∈ d\c

captured by x, otherwise Xc(x) = Xc(Xd (x)) . Now consider 

## X{q}(x). Since x ∈ X(c ∩ d), we know it must capture some property p ∈ c. And since q̸ ∈ c, it must be that p̸ = q. Thus, 

## X{q}(x) captures p, which means that X{q}(x) ∈ X(c).Next, consider Xc(x). We argued x ∈ X({q}). Since q̸ ∈ c,

## Xc(x) couldn’t have sanitized q. Thus, Xc(x) ∈ X({q}).

Theorem 1. Fix abstract concept γ and let c be a natural concept meeting the criteria of Definition 8. If Xc offers contrastive privacy with respect to γ, then for each z ∈ X(γ ∩

c), it must be that Xc(z) is private with respect to γ.Proof. According to Definition 5, it will suffice to show that for each rendering z ∈ X(γ ∩ c), its sanitization Xc(z) fails to capture concepts γ. To that end, suppose to the contrary that, although Xc offers contrastive privacy with respect to concept 

γ, there exists a rendering z ∈ X(γ ∩ c) such that Xc(z) ∈ X(γ).Since Xc(z) ∈ X(γ), we have by Lemma 1 that there must exist some property q ∈ γ\c such that X{q}(z) ∈ X(c) (i.e., the q sanitized from z captures c) and Xc(z) ∈ X({q}) (i.e., c

sanitized from z captures q). Now let x = z and y = X{q}(z).It must be the case that y remains in X(γ ∩ c) because q lies outside γ ∩ c. Since Xc offers contrastive privacy with respect to γ and x, y ∈ X(γ ∩ c), we have by Definition 8 that 

## D

## Xc(z), X{q}(z)



+ δ > D

## Xc(z), Xc(X{q}(z)) 



. (9) On the other hand, by assumption, γ is in the semantic closure of c, i.e. γ ⊆ cl (X , D, c), and by construction q ∈ γ. Therefore, we have by Definition 7 that c ∼ { q} (i.e., c is semantically connected by X and D to q). Now choose x = Xc(z) and 

y = X{q}(z). Notice that since Xc(z) ∈ X({q}), it must be the case that x̸ = Xc(y). Furthermore, noting from above that 

x ∈ X({q}) and y ∈ X(c), we have by Definition 6 that 

## D

## Xc(z), X{q}(z)



+ δ < D

## Xc(z), Xc(X{q}(z)) 



, (10) which contradicts Equation 9. 

Corollary 1. Let concepts γ and c meet the criteria of Def-inition 8. If Xc offers contrastive privacy with respect to γ,then γ ⊆ c, i.e., c covers γ.Proof. We prove the contrapositive. To that end, suppose that 

γ̸ ⊆ c. Take arbitrary p ∈ γ\c and let z be any rendering from 

X(γ ∩ c) that captures p. Such a z must exist by the repre-sentability assumption. By construction, Xc(z)̸ = Xγ(Xc(z)) ,and so by Definition 5, Xc(z) is not private with respect to γ.Thus, by applying the contrapositve of Theorem 1, it follows that Xc cannot offer contrastive privacy with respect to γ.Corollary 1 shows that the test implicit in Definition 8 matches our intuitive expectation that any c whose sanitization privatizes γ must also cover γ, i.e., γ ⊆ c. Notice that the only requirements Corollary 1 indirectly puts on X are that γ ⊆

cl (X , D, c) and that Inequality 4 is satisfied. Thus, even if Xc

does not perfectly sanitize c, the corollary ensures that the contrastive privacy test remains sufficient to establish that the concepts actually sanitized by Xc cover γ, provided that 

γ is in their semantic closure. This is a very useful property because, as we will see in Section 5, many SSMs do fail to 5perfectly sanitize natural concepts c. On the other hand, if D

fails to capture semantic connections latent in X, then it is 

possible for Xc to achieve contrastive privacy at resolution 0 even though c fails to cover γ. Thus, the quality of Xc is most critical to achieving the best resolution and the quality of D

is critical to creating a valid privacy test. 

# 4 Operationalizing Contrastive Privacy 

In this section, we detail the practical considerations that stem from operationalizing Section 3’s analysis. We (1) show that smaller proxy sets can efficiently test privacy; (2) explain how privacy is easier to enforce as δ increases, but more weakly enforces semantic similarities; (3) discuss the shortcomings of using LLMs/VLMs to determine if a sanitized image is private; and (4) list practical considerations of our approach. 

# 4.1 Proxy Sets 

Recalling that X is the set of all possible renderings of a given modality, it’s clear that even refinements like the subset of renderings that capture the intersection of γ and c, X(γ ∩

c), are typically not efficiently computable. However, it is reasonable to assume that a sample from X(γ ∩ c), such as a photo gallery, will comprise a comprehensive enough test set for a sufficiently rigorous privacy sub-test . We refer to such samples as proxy sets , which we denote by ˜X. Moreover, the contrastive privacy test is inherently conservative since Inequality 4 must hold for all elements in the set. Further, the machine learning tools used to implement D and Xc are also fallible. As a result, the larger the proxy set, the greater the opportunity for an overly conservative privacy assessment. For those reasons, we seek proxy sets that are just large enough to plausibly capture the entirety, or a sufficiently large portion, of γ. In practical terms, this means that we choose for ˜X a set of renderings that are representative of the abstract concept we wish to privatize. 

# 4.2 Impact of the Privacy Parameter 

For fixed concepts c, γ ⊆ P, meeting the conditions for con-trastive privacy, it’s always the case that privacy becomes 

easier to achieve as parameter δ increases. What’s less clear is what is lost as a tradeoff. Definition 8 also requires that γ lie in the semantic closure of c, i.e., γ ⊆ cl (X , D, c). According to Definitions 6 and 7, cl (X , D, c) is equivalent to the set of properties P ⊆ P that satisfy Inequalities 1 and 2 for all p ∈ P

and each x ∈ X({p}) and y ∈ X(c). These inequalities become 

harder to satisfy as δ increases. Thus, the semantic closure of c shrinks as δ increases. Ac-cordingly, in order to apply contrastive privacy, we tend to need a broader concept to ensure that γ is covered by the se-mantic closure of c. An alternative interpretation is that for fixed c, we more weakly enforce sensitivity to semantic simi-larities as δ increases. The latter interpretation is the reason that we refer to δ as privacy resolution .

Figure 3: A sanitized image of John Kerry and Leonardo DiCaprio. 

# 4.3 Large Language Models Give an Incom-plete Privacy Picture 

A natural approach to assess the privacy of SSMs is to use Large Language Models (LLMs) or Vision Language Models (VLMs). The idea is to provide an input text string or image, which is believed to be obfuscated from anything that reveals a given concept, and prompt the model to decide if privacy has indeed been achieved. There is no doubt that this approach is highly effective up to a point. Nevertheless, it ultimately fails to offer a reliable privacy measure due to the stochasticity of the models as well as the ambiguity and qualitative nature of language itself. To demonstrate the shortcomings of this approach consider the problem of deciding if the image in Figure 3 captures the abstract concept anything that reveals the identity of Leonardo DiCaprio . We gave this image and the follow-ing two prompts to Gemini 3 Pro. 

Prompt 1. Is there anything in this image that can identify Leonardo DiCaprio? 

Prompt 2. Can Leonardo DiCaprio be identified conclusively from this image? 

To Prompt 1 Gemini responded “Based on the visual clues and context of this specific photograph, the person on the right can be identified as Leonardo DiCaprio.” And to Prompt 2, Gemini responded, “Based on the image provided, no, Leonardo DiCaprio cannot be conclusively identified.” In both cases, Gemini went on to identify several of the same characteristics, such as the presence of a red bracelet and the likely location, as reasons for (Prompt 1) or against (Prompt 2) the identifiability of the actor. Thus, with only small changes to the prompt, the model’s privacy determination changed dramatically. In Prompt 3, we asked the model to identify the two people in the image without offering the answer. 

Prompt 3. Prompt 3: Identify the people in this image. 

To Prompt 3, Gemini responded “The two people in this im-age are Nigel Farage (on the left) and Tucker Carlson (on the right).” The model is capable of finding reasons to justify the presence of Leonardo DiCaprio, a posteriori , but it struggles to produce the actor as a candidate a priori .6It is tempting to use Prompt 3 as a binary test for privacy: if it does not successfully identify the instance in question, then the obfuscated image is private, otherwise it is not. There are three problems with this approach. First, LLMs and VLMs are inherently stochastic. In our experiments, Gemini 3 Pro returned different guesses for the people in the image when the query was repeated. How should we interpret the privacy of the obfuscation if the model successfully identified Leonard DiCaprio on the second, third, or fourth attempt? Second, this approach requires that we know the instance whose privacy we seek, up front. This was the case in our experiment, but need not always be the case. Consider, for example, the task of privatizing a collection of images of celebrities when we do not know which specific celebrities appear in any given image. Third, there is no way to quantify the extent of privacy loss in the event that the obfuscated image is deemed to have compromised privacy. 

# 4.4 Practical Considerations 

4.4.1 Concept Ambiguity Penalty 

Consider a person named Bob whose privacy, in reality, can be completely protected by obfuscating his face. Obfuscating all faces should privatize the instance of Bob . However, suppose that there exist several images where Bob appears next to an-other individual whose face has a very large semantic closure, such as Santa Claus. Then each of those images will require more comprehensive sanitization because properties of Santa Claus, other than his face, will be semantically connected with other images of Bob that also capture Santa Claus, such as all Christmas trees, even though Bob is not associated with Christmas. To be clear, this challenge arises because we have chosen to obfuscate more than is actually necessary (all faces, rather than Bob’s face). This problem arises because the privacy mechanism Xc

is a blunt tool that removes all instances of concept c — it is not possible for our approach to target the privacy of one instance of an abstract concept e ∈ γ but not another. Con-trastive privacy implicitly tests the privacy of every instance in I (cl (X , D, c)) . And the test is all-or-nothing; Inequal-ity 4 must hold for renderings that capture any instance in 

## I (cl (X , D, c)) . These restrictions mean that contrastive pri-vacy holds for e only if it holds for the most semantically rich instances in I (cl (X , D, c)) that are the most difficult to sanitize. We refer to this as the concept ambiguity penalty .Approaches to coping with concept ambiguity include. 1. Renderings that fail to achieve privacy due to a concept ambiguity penalty could be flagged and ultimately not released. 2. Just for renderings x ∈ X(γ ∩ c) that fail to achieve pri-vacy due to the concept ambiguity penalty, additional properties d ⊆ P could be obfuscated from x prior to applying the privacy test. 3. The concept c could be edited to remove semantically rich instances that are unrelated to the instances of inter-est. Approach 1 is the least desirable because it entirely fails to release some renderings. Approach 2 would involve obfuscating more features in images that cause Inequality 4 to fail, such as clothing or a silhouette. All images in the dataset are obfuscated minimally by c, and sometimes by d. Thus, we can only conclude that the obfuscated dataset is private with respect to abstract concepts in the semantic closure of c, not d.Approach 3 gives the most desirable result in that it both allows for all images to be released and avoids unnecessarily obfuscating concepts. In our example, it amounts to avoiding the obfuscation of any portion of an image related to Santa Claus. However, the approach also presents an additional tech-nical hurdle: solving the open entity recognition problem. In addition to custom solutions [ 25 , 60 ], LLMs and VLMs are also quite good at solving this problem in practice. 

4.4.2 Choosing Concepts c

The present work gives no insight into how to achieve con-trastive privacy, that is to say, how to choose c or how to sanitize a rendering x with respect to c. This amounts to dis-covering an effective SSM, which can be difficult. However, assuming those details are provided, Theorem 1 provides con-ditions under which we can be confident that the obfuscation of a natural concept c is sufficient to sanitize a semantically re-lated, but distinct, and in principle unknown, abstract concept 

γ.

4.4.3 X Must be Approximated 

In practice, Definition 8 must be applied to proxy set ˜X, as defined in Section 4.1, which introduces a potential source of error. Thus, it is not possible to provide privacy guaran-tees , only an approximation to the privacy afforded by Xc.This outcome should be contrasted with techniques such as differential privacy (DP) [ 18 ], which give absolute privacy guarantees. We note here, however, that the fact that we ar-rive at only an approximation of the privacy measurement for a given set of images is inevitable for another reason: the machine learning models that implement D and Xc are them-selves fallible, and their error rates are difficult to quantify. The advantage we have over DP is that our technique is more natural and explainable for the user. 

4.4.4 D Generally Requires Fine-Tuning 

Distance mechanism D is assumed to encode the semantic relationships between all properties associated with any given abstract concept. This assumption is likely approximately true only when the abstract concept is something in the train-ing set for the model underlying D. For example, if D is a pre-trained CLIP model, and the abstract concept being pri-vatized is the identity of an individual who is not particularly famous, then images capturing that individual likely do not appear in the training set for D. In this case, we must fine-tune CLIP on images of the individual to make D a good distance mechanism for the problem. We emphasize that only the target abstract privacy concept need be labeled. For exam-ple: a picture of John Doe or a picture containing 

7Algorithm 1 Contrastive Privacy Test in Cosine Space Require: proxy set ˜ X, concept c, abstract γ, priv. param. δ

S ← /0; T ← /0

for x ∈ ˜X(γ ∩ c) do ▷ for each item in the proxy set 

S ← S ∪ { E(Xc(x)) } ▷ store sanitized embedding 

T ← T ∪ { E(x) − E(Xc(x)) } ▷ store difference to orig. 

end for 

I ← DB.index (T) ▷ create a db index 

for u ∈ S do ▷ for each sanitized embedding 

v ← DB.nearest (I, u) ▷ find the closest diff. vector 

if u · v ≥ δ then ▷ failure, if dot-prod ≥ δ

return false 

end if end for return true ▷ success, otherwise 

protected health information . A detailed list of natu-ral concepts that reveal those abstract concepts need not be provided. Discussion of specific approaches to fine-tuning are beyond the scope of this document, but such tasks are well-understood and commonplace. 

# 4.5 Calculating Contrastive Privacy 

Approximating the test in Definition 8 implicitly requires 

O(| ˜X(γ ∩c)|) comparisons, which can be cumbersome to com-pute. In this section, we present a practical algorithm for cal-culating contrastive privacy in scenarios like the one described in Example 1, where the distance mechanism is cosine sim-ilarity over embeddings, which we expect to be a common application. Let concepts c, γ ⊆ P, meeting the conditions of Definition 8, be given, and fix the proxy set ˜X. In Example 1 we have shown that the test given by Inequality 6 is sufficient for contrastive privacy. Thus, it suffices for an algorithm to test this inequality for each pair of renderings x, y ∈ ˜X(γ ∩ c).Algorithm 1 accomplishes this using a vector database (such as FAISS [ 17 ]). In the algorithm, DB.index (S) cre-ates an index from the vectors in set S and DB.nearest (I, u)

returns the closest vector in I to vector u in terms of cosine similarity. The runtime of Algorithm 1 hinges on the implementation of DB.nearest . Let n = |T|. If DB.nearest is exact, then the method has O(n) runtime. Nevertheless, vector databases are optimized for precisely this calculation so they will fully utilize an available GPU and perform many comparisons con-currently. If the HNSW (Hierarchical Navigable Small World) approximation [ 38 ] is instead used for DB.nearest , then its runtime becomes O(log n). If an approximate algorithm is used, we make a weaker privacy guarantee; it remains possi-ble that there exists a small violation of the inequality. The size of the potential violation is tunable (trading off with run-time) and can be thought of as adding to the privacy parameter 

δ.

# 5 Privatization Experiments 

The primary purpose of this section is to demonstrate that contrastive privacy serves as a useful tool for identifying and quantifying privacy violations in real-world settings. Secon-darily, we show how various models perform on a limited number of privatization tasks as well as how privatization per-formance scales with data size. We leave for future work the task of systematic evaluation of the privatization capabilities of these models. (We note that our experiments cost roughly $1,200 USD in aggregate.) Contrastive privacy (Definition 8) is quite general. In prin-ciple, it is possible to test the privacy of SSMs across any modality including text, images, video, and audio and using many notions of sanitization including redaction, replacement, and inpainting. It is only necessary for sanitization to obfus-cate for each rendering something whose semantic closure covers the abstract concept and for there to exist a robust distance mechanism conforming to the assumptions of Defini-tion 1. Such mechanisms are most mature for text and images, which are the modalities that we chose to evaluate. Table 2 summarizes the models underlying our chosen mechanisms; we provide details of their use later in this sec-tion. For illustrative purposes, we have elected in all exper-iments to sanitize by redaction, replacing original pixels in images with black ones and replacing characters in text with boxes. 

# 5.1 Personal privacy 

We began by quantifying the contrastive privacy of col-lections of sanitized images with respect to a given ab-stract privacy concept. For this task we used the EVA CLIP model for the distance mechanism D as described in Algo-rithm 1. We performed sanitization in two phases, denoted as REDACT/CONCEPT . In the concept phase we created a list of natural concepts believed to cover the abstract concept either manually ( Manual ) or using one of the image-to-text (i2t) models in Table 2. The former involved an author it-eratively guessing concepts whose obfuscation would lead to better privacy and refining the set based on the eventual privacy resolution. The latter passed each image in the col-lection to the i2t model, prompting it to generate a list of concepts to be redacted. The responses were compiled into a master list used for redaction. 3 In the redaction phase, we prompted i2i sanitization mechanisms from Table 2 to redact the list of natural concepts derived in the concept phase. For example, iGPT1m/GEM31p means that GEM31p generated nat-ural concepts from a given set ˜X that is representative of the abstract concept; and iGPT1m is used to redact those con-cepts from ˜X. If redaction is prompted to remove the abstract concept directly, e.g. obfuscate celebrities from the image , then the concept phase is not performed. 

Methodology. Our first image-related task was to use the privacy test to detect failures from models’ sanitization of images containing Leonard DiCaprio. Our reasoning was that pretrained models such as EVA will likely possess native un-derstanding of well-known celebrities and concepts in their semantic closure. When i2i models alone were used for saniti-zation we gave them Prompt 5 (in Appendix E) with CONCEPT 

> 3Our goal was not to evaluate the ability of humans in general to generate concepts. Instead, we wanted a basic comparison against the models.

8Figure 4: (left) 30 images capturing Leonard DiCaprio sanitized of the identity of the celebrities by (center) 

iGPT1m/GEM31p , privacy resolution 0.02 and utility 0.42; (right) iGEM31f/Manual , privacy resolution 0 and utility 0.61, where 

## D is EVA for both. 

REDACTION MODEL 

CONCEPT GENERATION MODEL     

> GPT54 GEM31p OPS46 Manual None

iGPT15 0.2 

> 0.37
> 0.23
> 0.38
> 0.14
> 0.3
> 0
> 0.53
> 0.04
> 0.46

iGPT1m 0.06 

> 0.39
> 0.02
> 0.42
> 0.37
> 0.43
> 0.08
> 0.39
> 0.21
> 0.37

iGEM3p 0.32 

> 0.29
> 0.31
> 0.38
> 0.25
> 0.33
> 0.45
> 0.5
> 0.18
> 0.66

iGEM31f 0.24 

> 0.4
> 0.23
> 0.4
> 0.23
> 0.31
> 0
> 0.61
> 0.08
> 0.67

FLX2p 0.25 

> 0.69
> 0.19
> 0.66
> 0.22
> 0.7
> 0.18
> 0.73
> 0.16
> 0.75

FLX2d 0.11 

> 0.57
> 0.11
> 0.63
> 0.24
> 0.67
> 0.22
> 0.71
> 0.21
> 0.77

SAM3 0.09 

> 0.12
> 0.11
> 0.26
> 0.12
> 0.12
> 0
> 0.58

Figure 5: Privacy resolution and utility for 30 images captur-ing Leonardo DiCaprio sanitized of the identity of the celebrities . Diagonal cells: privacy resolution (red) and utility (blue); lighter color is better. Black-framed cells are Pareto optimal. Red-framed cells failed to sanitize one image due to model safeguards. being the identity of the celebrities . For two-stage sanitization, i2t models first returned natural concept lists in response to Prompt 6 with CONCEPT being the identity of the celebrities . In Appendix D outputs for GPT54 ,

GEM31p , and OPS46 are listed as Concepts 2, 3, and 4, respec-tively. Concepts 1, for Manual , were derived manually. Each i2i mechanism then performed their sanitization in response to Prompt 4, where OBJECTS were returned by the i2t model. 

Results. Figure 4 shows a collection of 30 images de-picting Leonard DiCaprio before (4a) and after sanitization via two different mechanisms Xc: iGPT1m/GEM31p (4b) and 

SAM3/Manual (4c). Algorithm 1 found that Xc achieved con-trastive privacy at resolution 0 for iGEM31f/Manual but not for iGPT1m/GEM31p . The image in the lower right corner of 

REDACTION MODEL 

CONCEPT GENERATION MODEL     

> GPT54 GEM31p OPS46 Manual None

iGPT15 0.31 

> 0.51
> 0.25
> 0.44
> 0.16
> 0.54
> 0.17
> 0.71
> 0.27
> 0.71

iGPT1m 0.3 

> 0.67
> 0.32
> 0.7
> 0.29
> 0.71
> 0.29
> 0.66
> 0.52
> 0.6

iGEM3p 0.53 

> 0.63
> 0.45
> 0.62
> 0.53
> 0.61
> 0.54
> 0.55
> 0.31
> 0.77

iGEM31f 0.41 

> 0.63
> 0.46
> 0.56
> 0.39
> 0.55
> 0.31
> 0.59
> 0.21
> 0.74

FLX2p 0.28 

> 0.78
> 0.3
> 0.75
> 0.32
> 0.78
> 0.25
> 0.79
> 0.31
> 0.8

FLX2d 0.33 

> 0.73
> 0.27
> 0.67
> 0.28
> 0.69
> 0.22
> 0.69
> 0.3
> 0.86

SAM3 0.4 

> 0.21
> 0.41
> 0.39
> 0.23
> 0.31
> 0.31
> 0.49

Figure 6: Privacy resolution (red) and utility (blue) from sanitizing the concept the identity of the fast food restaurant from 49 images of McDonald’s. (Data is the same as Figure 1a. Formatting is same as Figure 5. Figure 4c highlights a weakness of EVA as distance mecha-nism D. The text behind the obfuscated faces clearly spells out “Leonardo DiCaprio”. Thus, the final image is clearly 

not private with respect to the concept of the actor. This is a well-known limitation of CLIP models, not contrastive privacy itself. One solution is to add the concept text to c, obfuscat-ing all text. Another is to use a standard OCR library such as Tesseract to capture all text, and then apply Definition 8 to the extracted text. Figure 5 shows the privacy/utility tradeoff for all tested SSMs (listed in Table 2), each cell except those for Manual 

give the best privacy (and associated utility) across three tri-als. 4 Column “None” indicates that only the redaction phase was executed. We report utility as the cosine similarity be-

> 4Given the number of models we tested, these experiments were costly to run even when limited to 3 trials per combination.

9tween EVA embeddings of original and sanitized images. (Util-ity is maximized at 1.0.) This measure indirectly penalizes for both concept ambiguity and unnecessary redaction. Mechanism iGEM31f/Manual achieves absolute privacy and relatively high utility of 0.61. A variety of redaction-phase-only mechanisms Pareto-dominate for higher utility values. Generally, we see no clear advantage for higher param-eter nor later generation models. Moreover, we see that the same set of concepts (consistent within columns) led to drasti-cally different privacy resolution and utility across redaction models. As discussed in Section 3.3, Figure 2 shows both a privacy success (2a) and failure (2b) according to distance mechanism 

EVA . The primary difference between the two obfuscations is that all faces are sanitized in the successful obfuscation, but the face of a woman (likely an aide to then president pres-ident of Mexico, Enrique Peña Nieto) remains unsanitized in the image on the left in 2b. This a true failure because the abstract concept passed to Prompts 5 and 6 indicated that 

all celebrities should be obfuscated. Here we see that FLX2d 

appears ambivalent on the celebrity status of the woman, ob-fuscating her face in one image and not another. This is also an example of the concept ambiguity penalty at work (see Section 4.4.1). Although we only actually care to privatize the abstract concept of Leonard DiCaprio, we lazily asked for properties that describe celebrities in general. As a result, the properties associated with this woman were swept into the semantic closure of obfuscated concepts c because c includes all faces (see Concepts 3). For 2b, it is the presence of the woman’s face in Xc(x) coupled with the absence of her face in 

## Xc(y) that allows D(Xc(x), y) to be less than D(Xc(x), Xc(y)) ,causing the privacy failure. Figure 13 in Appendix G shows the most significant privacy failures according to Inequality 4 for each of the sanitizations listed in Table 2. Most of the failures are due again to the concept ambiguity penalty. In multiple cases, the sanitization mechanism has returned an image for Xc(y) that is nearly entirely black, which sweeps all properties in the image into concept c. This makes it very difficult for images Xc(x) and 

## Xc(y) to be closer than Xc(x) and y. The same scenario plays out when mechanisms that have returned black and white sil-houettes for Xc(y). The failure in cell FLX2d/GEM31p is more interesting. Obfuscation fails to remove Margot Robbie and a movie poster for the film Once Upon a Time... in Hollywood , a film in which DiCaprio starred. The privacy failure ostensibly arises from a semantic link between those instances and Di-Caprio being interviewed in the image on the right. Another interesting failure appears in cell iGPT15/GPT54 . Here the only prominent feature remaining in the image on the left is an ocean map. The semantic match with the image on the right is ostensibly due to the association of both Leonardo DiCaprio and John Kerry in the Our Ocean Conference. 

# 5.2 Brand privacy 

Methodology. We next turn our attention to privatiz-ing the concept of the identity of the fast food restaurant from a collection of 49 images capturing Mc-               

> GPT54
> 0.19 0.81
> GPT54m
> 0.34 0.74
> GPT52
> 0.22 0.8
> GPT4o
> 0.18 0.77
> GPT4om
> 0.17 0.74
> GEM31p
> 0.21 0.79
> GEM3f
> 0.24 0.67
> GEM25p
> 0.19 0.76
> GEM25f
> 0.22 0.8
> GEM2f
> 0.22 0.82
> OPS46
> 0.21 0.79
> OPS41
> 0.22 0.8
> SON46
> 0.23 0.85
> HAK45
> 0.23 0.86
> HAK35
> 0.22 0.79

Figure 7: Privacy resolution (red) and utility (blue) for 49 Reddit comments discussing an Avengers movie. (Data is the same as Figure 1b. Formatting is same as Figure 5.) Donald’s. We used this string as the CONCEPT in Prompts 5 and 6. In Appendix D outputs for concept phase models 

GPT54 , GEM31p , and OPS46 are listed as Concepts 6, 7, and 8, respectively. Their counterparts for a subset of nine images are listed as Concepts 9, 10, and 11, respectively. Concepts 12 were used for mechanism Manual in both the nine and 49 image collections. 

Results. This privacy problem is challenging because there exist many concepts semantically linked to a given brand. This difficulty is illustrated first with a subset of nine images, shown in Figure 9a (see Appendix F). Figures 9b and 9c show the result of sanitization using mechanisms iGPT15/GPT54 and 

SAM3/Manual , respectively. The latter achieved contrastive privacy at resolution 0 using the EVA distance mechanism. The former achieved contrastive privacy at resolution 0.05; it’s greatest failure contained a silhouetted “M” on a window. Figure 6 shows for the set of 49 images, and for each saniti-zation mechanism, the privacy resolution and utility ( EVA co-sine similarity of images before and after sanitization). Mech-anisms incorporating iGPT15 for the redaction phase gener-ally have lowest resolution while those incorporating FLX2d ,a smaller model, generally have highest utility. Mechanism 

iGEM31f , also a smaller model, has one of the lowest resolu-tions, making parameter size a poor predictor of performance. Figure 12 in Appendix F shows the original images (left) and the sanitizations made by mechanism iGPT15 .Figure 14 in Appendix G shows the most significant privacy failure that our method discovered for each of the SSMs tested. As was the case for the DiCaprio dataset, totally blacked-out images often triggered large privacy failures due to the ambi-guity penalty. Yet our framework detected many other genuine privacy failures. For example, FLX2p/OPS46 almost entirely fails to obfuscate the carton of french fries, iGPT1m/GEM31p 

fails to obfuscate any food items, and iGEM3p leaves unobfus-cated most of the exterior of a McDonald’s restaurant. 

# 5.3 Text privatization 

Methodology. Contrastive privacy can also be applied to text renderings. We analyzed a set of 49 Reddit comments (origi-nally collected [ 5 ] in April, 2019), which capture the Avengers 

movie franchise. We have made the chosen passages publicly available 5. We chose a relatively old dataset in order to en-

> 5https://github.com/umass-forensics/contrastive-privacy

10 Xc(x) (ejujfgx) y (ejunc9k)      

> That explains a lot. The Phase 1s felt new. Part of that is certainly due to the sudden resurgence of the superhero movie, but some of the later films felt like they could have recaptured that and just didn’t. I generally enjoy the more recent films, but they feel cookie cutter. I’ll watch them, but I rarely get excited about seeing them like I did for or the original .Watchmen, Dark Knight, Avengers
> Xc(x)Xc(y)
> That explains a lot. The Phase 1s felt new. Part of that is certainly due to the sudden resurgence of the superhero movie, but some of the later films felt like they could have recaptured that and just didn’t. I generally enjoy the more recent films, but they feel cookie cutter. I’ll watch them, but I rarely get excited about seeing them like I did for or the original .,,

Figure 8: The most significant privacy failure for mechanism 

GPT54 using the distance mechanism QWEN3 on the 49 com-ment Avengers dataset. sure that the topics covered, and perhaps even the data itself, were part of the training data used by our chosen distance mechanism QWEN3 . We tested 15 different LLM-based SSMs, shown in Figure 7, and one open-vocabulary entity recog-nition system, GLN2 . The LLM-based mechanisms sanitized the passages in response to Prompt 7. And GLN2 sanitized manually chosen Concepts 13, where quoted items indicate entity removal (i.e., the exact word was removed). In all cases, we measured utility in terms of the cosine similarity between passages before and after sanitization when embedded with the QWEN3 model. 

Results. On a subset of nine comments, the GLN2 mecha-nism achieved contrastive privacy at resolution 0, according to the QWEN3 distance mechanism, and has utility of 0.75. The contrastive privacy test determined that no other mechanism evaluated achieved privacy at resolution 0 on this dataset; 

GEM25p was closest with privacy achieved at resolution 0.04 and utility 0.78. On the full dataset of 49 comments, GLN2 

achieved privacy at resolution 0.18 with utility 0.77. Figure 7 shows the utility / privacy tradeoff for the LLM-based mecha-nisms. Utility remained fairly high relative to the nine image sample, but privacy resolution was poor across all mecha-nisms. Figure 8 shows the most significant privacy failure on the 49 comment dataset for the SSM GPT54 . The mechanism sanitized terms “Iron Man” and “Avengers” from passage x

(on the left), but left the term “superhero movie”, which forms a strong semantic connection to y: “Watchmen, Dark Knight, Avengers”. This same comparison, with similar sanitizations, was also the most significant privacy failure for GPT4o , HAK45 ,and HAK35 . The second most significant privacy failure for 

GPT54 matched against the same passage y with Xc(x) having sanitized phrases such as “comic”, “single giant crossover with six or seven heroes”, and “films grossing around 200 million”, which hint strongly at the Avengers . This same comparison gave the most significant privacy failure for GPT4om . All SSMs on the Pareto frontier had their most significant privacy failure for one of the two comparisons described in this paragraph. This suggests that mechanisms for text tend to perform in more uniform fashion across model families. 

# 6 Resolution analysis 

Privacy engineers will inevitably need to release renderings sanitized with a mechanism that is unable to achieve con-trastive privacy at resolution 0 using a chosen distance mecha-nism. In such cases, it’s natural to question what the resolution achieved says about the extent of the privacy of the sanitized renderings. Resolution parameter δ has no units and is difficult to di-rectly interpret. Nevertheless, it can be understood via analogy to everyday semantic comparisons. Table 1 shows the resolu-tion of semantic connections between pairs of concepts cap-tured by images (left) and text (right) according to Definition 6, using the EVA (left) and QWEN3 (right) distance mechanisms, and sanitizing concepts using SAM3 and GLN2 , respectively. Let V (Xc, γ) denote the smallest δ for which Xc achieves contrastive privacy with respect to γ. If V (Xc, γ) is less than or equal to the resolution of semantic connection between a given pair of concepts, then an adversary thwarting the privacy of mechanism Xc would need to be able to divine connec-tions between concepts in γ no more connected than that pair. For example, if D is EVA and V (Xc, γ) = 0.136 , then Table 1 shows that Xc is private with respect to γ for any adversary that fails to draw a connection between concepts in γ that are less similar than 95% of all instances of the concepts of dog 

and cat .

# 7 Related Work 

Our experiments in Section 5 offer performance comparisons of a variety of frontier models: for images, we compared 4 models for concept generation (as well as manual) and 7 mod-els for redaction (34 combinations); for text, we compared 15 redaction models (as well as manual). Related work offers a number of other approaches to sanitization overviewed below. 

Sanitization systems. General AI-based sanitization in-cludes: VisShield [ 13 ], an AI privacy filter for Protected Health Information (PHI); GUIGuard [ 59 ], which privatizes screenshots sent to remote agents for inference. Commer-cial services include AWS Comprehend, Microsoft Presidio, Google Cloud Data Loss Prevention, and Privacy Filter from OpenAI. VisShield and GUIGuard as well as the commer-cial solutions can be tested with our approach, but all offer privacy for specialized domains (e.g., software development, health data, or enterprise compliance) that require fine-tuning a distance mechanism in each context to have a complete pri-vacy picture. Because our paper is primarily concerned with introducing our approach and laying the groundwork for prac-tical use (and due to monetary costs), we defer direct testing with these systems to future work. (Imago Obscura [ 42 ], an 11 Image (EVA ) Text (QWEN3 )CONCEPTS COMPARED PERCENTILE RESOLUTION                        

> 90% 95% 99% 90% 95% 99%
> dog vs. orange 0.075 0.093 0.127 0.004 0.012 0.022
> dog vs. cat 0.103 0.136 0.191 0.037 0.050 0.040
> orange vs. lemon 0.135 0.198 0.309 0.052 0.064 0.087

Table 1: For various percentiles, the resolution at which the given distance mechanism finds no semantic link between two concepts AI-guided redaction tool cannot be directly tested with our ap-proach. AI-based Unsafe2Safe [ 16 ] is not publicly available.) 

Measuring sanitization privacy. Abdulaziz et al. [ 1] for-mulate a framework for evaluating identity obfuscation tech-niques applied to AI sanitization methods. Like us, they find no single best method and that AI sanitization techniques typically do not ensure privacy. Their approach is limited com-pared to ours in that it measures privacy only with respect to 18 different manually labeled human attributes. Patwari et al. [ 45 ] evaluate the privacy of techniques that obfuscate identities in images. They train a neural network with human annotations to identify obfuscation failures. This approach is limited compared to ours in that (1) it requires human labeling and its privacy measure is extremely coarse, and (2) privacy determinations are limited by human annotator efforts/skills (cf., semantics learned by very large models). Garza et al. [ 22 ] evaluate LLMs as PII redaction tools. They found that instruction-tuned LLMs could provide high utility outputs while minimally leaking privacy. They used SPriV as the privacy metric, which measures the proportion of private tokens leaked, and requires a hand-labeled ground truth test set. Asiri et al. [ 2] build an entity graph, and similar to us, use graph connectivity to detect semantic links. Unfortunately, en-tity graphs capture only a fraction of the semantic information encoded in modern embedding models. Many other privatization works exist, listed below. But since they do not sanitize lists of concepts from unstructured data, they cannot be directly evaluated by our approach. 

Generative models. Many works focus on privatization with generative models that preserves contextual integrity. Early methods required bounding boxes and tended to focus on faces only [ 28 , 41 , 56 , 57 ], some having privacy guaran-tees [ 35 ]. Later methods seamlessly blend anonymized objects with the original background [4, 11, 19, 27, 30, 39, 65]. 

Privacy from face recognition. Early work from Ilia et al. [ 29 ] introduces access control at the level of faces as op-posed to files. Several systems perturb facial features in im-ages to prevent face detection [ 10 , 31 , 50 ]. Yan et al. [ 63 ]provide strong privacy for faces in images with high utility us-ing differential privacy (DP). Shoshitaishvili et al. [ 55 ] show that face detection can infer human relationships from images. 

Privatizing text. Many have noted that LLMs can be made to elicit exact text passages from their training data [ 9, 24 ], even after privatizing using DP [ 44 ]. Pr εε mpt [ 52 ] sanitizes prompts to LLMs using DP at the token level. Pham et al. [ 48 ]demonstrate that LLMs do a surprisingly poor job obfuscating named entities. Xin et al. [ 61 ] quantifies individual privacy risks from re-identification attacks. In contrast to our work, their assessment is based on subjective privacy loss measures, such as LLM-assessed severity of linked auxiliary information. Paudel [ 46 ] shows that traditional measures of privacy can be overly optimistic when applied to LLM sanitization. 

Differential privacy. There exists much work on DP and its variants for unstructured data. These techniques are largely orthogonal to ours, which does not attempt to provide an abso-lute privacy guarantee. Yet, it is a complementary mechanism: DP can be applied to segmented concepts in an image as a subroutine of the sanitization mechanisms of Section 3. Zhao and Chen [ 64 ] differentiate between three distinct ap-proaches: pixel-level, latent vector (e.g., based on generative models), and metric DP. Maris et al. [ 40 ] extend k-anonymity and DP to images, evaluating the privacy/utility tradeoff in person re-identification attacks. Pittaluga et al. [ 49 ] develop a mechanism for privatizing an entire image, and Xue et al. [ 62 ]use a heuristic procedure to select identifying features in a face and add noise to that face. Persuasive Privacy [ 8] generalizes certain types of DP, measuring privacy of deterministic sys-tems semantically in the sense of an adversary’s knowledge. It does not measure the privacy of linguistically semantic fea-tures like we do. Li et al. [ 34 ] provide an alternative to DP by shuffling pixels in an image. Chen et al. [ 12 ] introduces perceptual indistinguishability by altering faces so that they are similar, but ultimately unlinkable to the originals. Li et al. [ 33 ] recognizes that the social concept of privacy often refers to re-identification of individuals, requiring an un-derstanding of the adversary’s background knowledge. They model this knowledge as a distribution. Our work can be seen as instead representing background knowledge with a model trained on information ostensibly known by the adversary. 

Privacy of video and audio. Work in video includes pri-vatizing blocks across time [ 3, 32 ], face obfuscation across frames [ 51 ], in real time [ 26 ], and GANs to preserve utility. Several works obfuscate audio recordings [7, 23, 36, 47]. 

# 8 Conclusion 

Increasingly, AI-models are being used to sanitize media based on natural language prompts. We have introduced con-trastive privacy , a formal definition of privacy that yields an algorithm that uses embedding models such as CLIP to con-12 nect concepts latent in media files to identify and quantify privacy failures. Contrastive privacy accepts a corpus of media, each cap-turing an abstract concept to be made private that is difficult to specify. Its privacy test determines if a set of simple to specify sanitization concepts are sufficient to privatize the target. We show that our test is sensitive to privacy loss to the extent that (1) the dataset fully represents the privacy tar-get, and (2) the mechanisms that implement it are sensitive to similarities between concepts related to the privacy target. We also demonstrated the practicality of our contrastive privacy test by using it to quantitatively assess the privacy of a group of AI sanitization mechanisms applied to both image and text sanitization problems. We find that neither general model complexity nor generation necessarily predict the contrastive privacy achieved by the mechanism. 

# References 

[1] S. Abdulaziz, G. D’amicantonio, and E. Bondarev. Evaluation of human visual privacy protection: Three-dimensional framework and benchmark dataset. In Pro-ceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , pages 5893–5902, 2025. [2] S. Asiri, R. Alshehri, F. Kamran, H. Laznam, Y. Xiao, and S. Alzahrani. Spadr: A context-aware pipeline for privacy risk detection in text data. Electronics , 14(18): 3725, 2025. [3] N. Aslam, A. Ray, J. B. Haurum, L. Esterle, and K. Nas-rollahi. From pixels to privacy: Temporally consis-tent video anonymization via token pruning for pri-vacy preserving action recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.26336 , 2026. [4] S. Barattin, C. Tzelepis, I. Patras, and N. Sebe. Attribute-preserving face dataset anonymization via latent code optimization. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF confer-ence on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 8001–8010, 2023. [5] J. Baumgartner, S. Zannettou, B. Keegan, M. Squire, and J. Blackburn. The pushshift reddit dataset. In Proceed-ings of the international AAAI conference on web and social media , volume 14, pages 830–839, 2020. [6] BBC News. Thousands of epstein documents taken down after victims identified, 2026. https://www.bb c.com/news/articles/cn0k65pnxjxo . Accessed: 2026-03-06. [7] G. Bibbo, A. Singh, T. Deacon, and M. D. Plumbley. Speech removal framework for privacy-preserving audio recordings. In Proceedings of the IEEE Workshop on Ap-plications of Signal Processing to Audio and Acoustics (WASPAA) , 2025. [8] J. J. Bon, J. Bailie, J. Rousseau, and C. P. Robert. Per-suasive privacy. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.22945 , 2026. [9] N. Carlini, F. Tramer, E. Wallace, M. Jagielski, A. Herbert-Voss, K. Lee, A. Roberts, T. Brown, D. Song, U. Erlingsson, et al. Extracting training data from large language models. In 30th USENIX security symposium (USENIX Security 21) , pages 2633–2650, 2021. [10] V. Chandrasekaran, C. Gao, B. Tang, K. Fawaz, S. Jha, and S. Banerjee. Face-off: Adversarial face obfusca-tion. Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies (PoPETs) , 2021(2):369–390, 2021. doi: 10.2478/popets -2021-0032. [11] H. Chang, M. Chen, H. Wang, and Q. Zhang. Privacy preserving semantic communications using vision lan-guage models: A segmentation and generation approach. In MILCOM 2025-2025 IEEE Military Communications Conference (MILCOM) , pages 1365–1370. IEEE, 2025. [12] J.-W. Chen, L.-J. Chen, C.-M. Yu, and C.-S. Lu. Per-ceptual indistinguishability-net (pi-net): Facial image obfuscation with manipulable semantics. In Proceed-ings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 6478–6487, 2021. [13] T. Chen, P. Li, K. Zhou, T. Chen, and H. Wei. Vision lan-guage model helps private information de-identification in vision data. In Findings of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics: ACL 2025 , pages 4558–4572, 2025. [14] R. Cummings and J. Sarathy. Centering policy and practice: Research gaps around usable differential pri-vacy. In 2023 5th IEEE International Conference on Trust, Privacy and Security in Intelligent Systems and Applications (TPS-ISA) , pages 122–135, 2023. doi: 10.1109/TPS-ISA58951.2023.00024. [15] D. Deuber, M. Keuchen, and N. Christin. Assessing anonymity techniques employed in german court deci-sions: A {De-Anonymization } experiment. In 32nd USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 23) ,pages 5199–5216, 2023. [16] M. Dinh and S. Jin. Unsafe2safe: Controllable image anonymization for downstream utility. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.28605 , 2026. [17] M. Douze, A. Guzhva, C. Deng, J. Johnson, G. Szilvasy, P.-E. Mazaré, M. Lomeli, L. Hosseini, and H. Jégou. The faiss library. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.08281 , 2024. [18] C. Dwork and A. Roth. The algorithmic foundations of differential privacy. Foundations and trends® in theo-retical computer science , 9(3-4):211–487, 2014. [19] M. B. Ertan, R. Sahu, P. H. Nguyen, K. Mahmood, and M. van Dijk. Beyond anonymization: Object scrubbing for privacy-preserving 2d and 3d vision tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.16557 , 2025. [20] S. L. Garfinkel. De-identification of personal informa-tion. Technical report, National Institute of Standards and Technology, October 2015. 13 [21] G. M. Garrido, X. Liu, F. Matthes, and D. Song. Lessons learned: Surveying the practicality of differential privacy in the industry. Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies , 2023. [22] L. Garza, A. Kotal, A. Piplai, L. Elluri, P. K. Das, and A. Chadha. Prvl: Quantifying the capabilities and risks of large language models for pii redaction. In 2025 IEEE 7th International Conference on Trust, Privacy and Security in Intelligent Systems, and Applications (TPS-ISA) , pages 148–159. IEEE, 2025. [23] S. Ghosh, F. Dreyer, T. Thiele, F. Lorbeer, and S. Stober. Improving voice quality in speech anonymization with just perception-informed losses. In Audio Imagination: NeurIPS 2024 Workshop AI-Driven Speech, Music, and Sound Generation , 2024. [24] J. He, Y. Lu, Z. Lin, K. Chen, and Y. Zhao. 

{PrivacyXray }: Detecting privacy breaches in {LLMs }

through semantic consistency and probability certainty. In 34th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 25) , pages 8195–8214, 2025. [25] H. Hu, Y. Luan, Y. Chen, U. Khandelwal, M. Joshi, K. Lee, K. Toutanova, and M.-W. Chang. Open-domain visual entity recognition: Towards recognizing millions of wikipedia entities. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , pages 12065–12075, 2023. [26] J. Huh, J. Kang, J. Woo, and S. Lee. A novel intelli-gent video surveillance system using low-traffic scene-preserving video anonymization. ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology , 16(2):1–24, 2025. [27] H. Hukkelås and F. Lindseth. Deepprivacy2: Towards realistic full-body anonymization. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF winter conference on applications of com-puter vision , pages 1329–1338, 2023. [28] H. Hukkelås, R. Mester, and F. Lindseth. Deepprivacy: A generative adversarial network for face anonymization. In International symposium on visual computing , pages 565–578. Springer, 2019. [29] P. Ilia, I. Polakis, E. Athanasopoulos, F. Maggi, and S. Ioannidis. Face/off: Preventing privacy leakage from photos in social networks. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGSAC Conference on computer and communica-tions security , pages 781–792, USA, 2015. ACM. [30] H.-W. Kung, T. Varanka, S. Saha, T. Sim, and N. Sebe. Face anonymization made simple. In 2025 IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV) , pages 1040–1050. IEEE, 2025. [31] M.-H. Le and N. Carlsson. DiffPrivate: Facial privacy protection with diffusion models. Proceedings on Pri-vacy Enhancing Technologies (PoPETs) , 2025(2):1–24, 2025. doi: 10.56553/popets-2025-0049. To appear. [32] M. Li, X. Xu, H. Fan, P. Zhou, J. Liu, J.-W. Liu, J. Li, J. Keppo, M. Z. Shou, and S. Yan. Stprivacy: Spatio-temporal privacy-preserving action recognition. In Pro-ceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , pages 5106–5115, 2023. [33] N. Li, W. Qardaji, D. Su, Y. Wu, and W. Yang. Mem-bership privacy: A unifying framework for privacy defi-nitions. In Proceedings of the 2013 ACM SIGSAC con-ference on Computer & communications security , pages 889–900, USA, 2013. ACM. [34] Q. Li, Y. Zhang, J. Ren, Q. Li, and Y. Zhang. You can use but cannot recognize: Preserving visual privacy in deep neural networks. In Proceedings of the 2024 Network and Distributed System Security Symposium (NDSS) ,USA, 2024. ISOC. URL https://www.ndss-sympo sium.org/wp-content/uploads/2024-1361-paper .pdf .[35] T. Li and C. Clifton. Differentially private imaging via latent space manipulation, 2021. URL https://arxiv. org/abs/2103.05472 .[36] J. Lim, K. Kim, H. Yu, and S.-B. Lee. Overo: Sharing private audio recordings. In Proceedings of the 2022 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communi-cations Security , pages 1933–1946, USA, 2022. ACM. [37] R. Lin. Police body worn cameras and privacy: Retain-ing benefits while reducing public concerns. Duke L. & Tech. Rev. , 14:346, 2015. [38] Y. A. Malkov. Efficient and robust approximate near-est neighbor search using hierarchical navigable small world graphs. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence , 42(4):824–836, 2018. [39] S. Malm, V. Rönnbäck, A. Håkansson, M.-H. Le, K. Woj-tulewicz, and N. Carlsson. Rad: Realistic anonymization of images using stable diffusion. In Proceedings of the 23rd Workshop on Privacy in the Electronic Society ,pages 193–211, 2023. [40] L. Maris, Y. Matsuda, and K. Yasumoto. Differential privacy and k-anonymity for pedestrian image data: Im-pact on cross-camera person re-identification and de-mographic predictions. ACM Transactions on Cyber-Physical Systems , 9(4):1–31, 2025. [41] M. Maximov, I. Elezi, and L. Leal-Taixé. Ciagan: Con-ditional identity anonymization generative adversarial networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 5447– 5456, 2020. [42] K. Monteiro, Y. Wu, and S. Das. Imago obscura: An image privacy ai co-pilot to enable identification and mit-igation of risks. In Proceedings of the 38th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology ,pages 1–26, USA, 2025. ACM. 14 [43] H. Nissenbaum. Privacy as contextual integrity. Wash. L. Rev. , 79:119, 2004. [44] S. Pang, Z. Lu, H. Wang, P. Fu, Y. Zhou, and M. Xue. Re-construction of differentially private text sanitization via large language models. In 2025 28th International Sym-posium on Research in Attacks, Intrusions and Defenses (RAID) , pages 1–17. IEEE, 2025. [45] K. Patwari, C.-N. Chuah, L. Lyu, and V. Sharma. Per-ceptanon: Exploring the human perception of image anonymization beyond pseudonymization for gdpr. In 

Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learn-ing , 2024. [46] B. Paudel, B. Mandal, G. Amariucai, and S. Wei. Sani-tization or deception? rethinking privacy protection in large language models. Proceedings on Privacy Enhanc-ing Technologies , 2026. [47] J. M. Perero-Codosero, F. M. Espinoza-Cuadros, and L. A. Hernández-Gómez. X-vector anonymization us-ing autoencoders and adversarial training for preserv-ing speech privacy. Computer Speech & Language , 74: 101351, 2022. [48] D. Pham, P. Kairouz, N. Mireshghallah, E. Bagdasarian, C. M. Pham, and A. Houmansadr. Can large language models really recognize your name? arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.14549 , 2025. [49] F. Pittaluga and B. Zhuang. Ldp-feat: Image features with local differential privacy. In 2023 IEEE/CVF Inter-national Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , pages 17534–17544. IEEE, 2023. [50] A. Rajabi, R. B. Bobba, M. Rosulek, C. V. Wright, and W.-c. Feng. On the (im)practicality of adversarial per-turbation for image privacy. Proceedings on Privacy En-hancing Technologies (PoPETs) , 2021(1):85–106, 2021. doi: 10.2478/popets-2021-0006. [51] F. Rosberg, E. E. Aksoy, C. Englund, and F. Alonso-Fernandez. Fiva: facial image and video anonymiza-tion and anonymization defense. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vi-sion , pages 362–371, 2023. [52] A. Roy Chowdhury, D. Glukhov, D. Anshumaan, P. Cha-lasani, N. Papernot, S. Jha, and M. Bellare. Pr εε mpt: Sanitizing sensitive prompts for LLMs. In Proceedings of the Network and Distributed System Security (NDSS) Symposium 2026 , February 2026. [53] M. J. Schneider, J. Bailie, and D. Iacobucci. Why data anonymization has not taken off. Customer Needs and Solutions , 12(1):9, 2025. doi: 10.1007/s40547-025-001 58-5. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/s40547-025 -00158-5 .[54] Seattle Police Department. Body-worn video, 2026. https://www.seattle.gov/police/about-us/issues-and-topics/body-worn-video. Accessed: 2026-03-06. [55] Y. Shoshitaishvili, C. Kruegel, and G. Vigna. Portrait of a privacy invasion: Detecting relationships through large-scale photo analysis. Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies (PoPETs) , 2015(1):41–60, 2015. doi: 10.1 515/popets-2015-0004. [56] Q. Sun, L. Ma, S. J. Oh, L. Van Gool, B. Schiele, and M. Fritz. Natural and effective obfuscation by head inpainting. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 5050– 5059, 2018. [57] Q. Sun, A. Tewari, W. Xu, M. Fritz, C. Theobalt, and B. Schiele. A hybrid model for identity obfuscation by face replacement. In Proceedings of the European conference on computer vision (ECCV) , pages 553–569, 2018. [58] U.S. Department of Health and Human Ser-vices. Methods for de-identification of phi, 2026. https://www.hhs.gov/hipaa/for-professionals/special-topics/de-identification/index.html. Accessed: 2026-03-06. [59] Y. Wang, Z. Zhang, W. Zhou, W. Zhang, J. Zhang, Q. Zhu, Y. Shi, S. Zheng, and J. He. Guiguard: Toward a general framework for privacy-preserving gui agents. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.18842 , 2026. [60] L. Wu, F. Petroni, M. Josifoski, S. Riedel, and L. Zettle-moyer. Scalable zero-shot entity linking with dense entity retrieval. In Proceedings of the 2020 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing (EMNLP) , pages 6397–6407, 2020. [61] R. Xin, N. Mireshghallah, S. S. Li, M. Duan, H. Kim, Y. Choi, Y. Tsvetkov, S. Oh, and P. W. Koh. A false sense of privacy: Evaluating textual data sanitization beyond surface-level privacy leakage. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.21035 , 2025. [62] H. Xue, B. Liu, M. Ding, T. Zhu, D. Ye, L. Song, and W. Zhou. Dp-image: Differential privacy for image data in feature space. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.07073 , 2021. [63] H. Yan, X. Li, W. Zhang, Q. Chen, B. Wang, H. Li, and X. Lin. Coder: Protecting privacy in image retrieval with differential privacy. IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing , 21(6):5420–5430, 2024. [64] Y. Zhao and J. Chen. A survey on differential privacy for unstructured data content. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) , 54(10s):1–28, 2022. [65] P. Zwick, K. Roesch, M. Klemp, and O. Bring-mann. Context-aware full body anonymization us-ing text-to-image diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.08551 , 2024. 15 A Code Availability 

All artifacts needed to evaluate this paper’s core contributions are available in the following GitHub repository: https:// github.com/umass-forensics/contrastive-privacy .We note the following artifacts in particular. • All data used in the experiments included in this paper can be found in the top-level data folder. This includes both images and text. • All scripts used to perform the analysis described in this paper can be found in the src/semantic_privacy/ scripts folder. • The command lines used to run each of the experiments described in this paper (except for resolution analysis) can be found in experiments.sh .• Detailed setup and execution instructions as well as ex-planation of parameters can be found in README.md .

# B Examples of Semantically Connected Con-cepts 

We demonstrate that CLIP ViT-L/14 determines that apples and oranges are semantically connected, but that oranges and iPhones are not. Here we remove the objects instead of black-ing out pixels. All images are synthetically generated. 

Example 1. c=Oranges and d=apples are connected. 

x= y= D(x, y) = 0.33 

Xc(x)= y= D(Xc(x), y) = 0.41 

x= Xd (y)= D(x, Xd (y)) = 0.42 

To check semantic connectedness, we confirm there is a δ ≥ 0s.t. Eqs. 1 and 2 are true: 

## D(x, y) + δ < D(Xc(x), y) ⇒ 0.33 + δ < 0.41 

## D(x, y) + δ < D(x, Xd (y)) ⇒ 0.33 + δ < 0.42 The equations hold for any δ < 0.08. 

Example 2. c=Oranges and d=iPhones are not connected. 

x= y= D(x, y) = 0.42 

Xc(x)= y= D(Xc(x), y) = 0.49 

x= Xd (y)= D(x, Xd (y)) = 0.37 

To check semantic connectedness, we seek δ ≥ 0 s.t. Eqs. 1 and 2 are true. 

## D(x, y) + δ < D(Xc(x), y) ⇒ 0.42 + δ < 0.49 

## D(x, y) + δ < D(x, Xd (y)) ⇒ 0.42 + δ < 0.37 No such δ > 0 exists. 

# C Mechanisms      

> Mechanism Name Model Modality
> Distance EVA EVA-CLIP-18B images
> (

D) QWEN3 Qwen3-Embedding-8B text                        

> GPT54 GPT 5.4 i2t, t2t
> GPT54m GPT 5.4 Mini t2t
> GPT52 GPT 5.2 t2t
> GPT4o GPT 4o t2t
> GPT4om GPT 4o Mini t2t
> GEM31p Gemini 3.1 Pro i2t, t2t
> GEM3f Gemini 3 Flash t2t
> GEM25p Gemini 2.5 Pro t2t
> GEM25f Gemini 2.5 Flash t2t
> GEM2f Gemini 2 Flash t2t
> Sanitization OPS46 Opus 4.6 i2t, t2t
> (

Xc) OPS41 Opus 4.1 t2t                      

> SON46 Sonnet 4.6 t2t
> HAK45 Sonnet 4.5 t2t
> HAK35 Sonnet 3.5 t2t
> iGPT15 GPT Image 1.5 i2i
> iGPT1m GPT Image 1 Mini i2i
> iGEM3p Gemini 3 Pro Image i2i
> iGEM31f Gemini 3.1 Flash Image i2i
> FLX2p FLUX 2 Pro i2i
> FLX2d FLUX 2 Dev i2i
> SAM3 SAM3 i2i
> GLN2 GLiNER2 base v1 t2t

Table 2: Distance and Sanitization Mechanisms. SAM3 sets the following parameters: threshold = 0.2, blur = 5, and dilate = 25. GLN2 sets threshold = 0.05. 

# D Obfuscation Concepts 

Concepts 1. face, flags, globe hair, logo, map, neck 

Concepts 2. accessories, age appearance, beard, body build, body shape, body silhouette, bodyguard, celebrity face, 

16 celebrity name, clothing, distinctive clothing, distinctive fea-tures, distinctive profile, event backdrop, event signage, event text, event title, eye color, face, faces, facial features, facial hair, festival logo, festival text, formal attire, formal clothing, formal suit, glasses, group composition, group lineup, hair color, hairstyle, hairstyles, headwear, jewelry, lapel pin, logo, military insignia, name badge, name plaque, name tag, person, person name, portrait, pose, profile, profile view, red carpet, red carpet photo, red carpet setting, service medals, side pro-file, smile, sponsor logo, suit, text, tie 

Concepts 3. award, badge, face, facial hair, glasses, head, id badge, logo, medals, military uniform, name tag, nameplate, person, plaque, sign, text 

Concepts 4. backdrop text, badge, beard, body shape, brand logo, building facade, building plaque, building sign, bust sculpture, clothing, clothing style, credential badge, document, emblem, event backdrop, event banner, event logo, event name, event signage, event text, eyeglasses, face, facial features, fa-cial hair, festival name, flag, flag pin, goatee, government build-ing, government emblem, government seal, hairstyle, hashtag, lanyard, lapel pin, large screen, military uniform, movie title, name placard, name plaque, name tag, name text, national flags, naval uniform, official seal, organization text, plaque, podium, portrait painting, premiere background, projected text, red carpet, seal, sponsor logo, sponsor text, stage backdrop 

Concepts 5. advertisement banner, architectural design, barcode, billboard ad, brand colors, brand icon, brand icons, brand mark, brand mascots, brand name, brand sig-nage, brand slogan, brand symbol, brand text, branded bags, branded colors, branded cups, branded icons, branded kiosk, branded packaging, building facade, building facade text, building logo, cafe sub-brand, character image, counter de-cals, counter text, cup branding, cup design, cup logo, delivery box branding, distinctive arches, distinctive color scheme, dis-tinctive colors, distinctive icon, door stickers, drink cup, drink cup logo, drink cups, drink machine branding, drive-thru sign, employee name tag, employee uniform logo, flag text, food ads, food container, food images, food packaging, food wrap-per, food wrappers, fry carton, golden arches, hat logo, hours sign, interior branding colors, interior decor, item names, logo, map graphic, mascot characters, mascot costume, mascot icon, mascot statue, menu advertisement, menu board, menu boards, menu branding, menu flyer, menu images, menu item name, menu item text, menu items, menu posters, menu prices, menu screen, menu screens, menu sign, menu text, on-screen text, order screen, packaging, packaging design, packaging logo, packaging text, paper bag, paper bags, phone number, play area sign, prices, printed pattern, product branding, prod-uct icons, product name, product names, product packaging, product photos, promotional banner text, promotional poster, promotional posters, promotional screens, promotional sig-nage, promotional text, receipt, receipt header, receipt kiosk, receipt text, restaurant decor, restaurant logo, restaurant name, restaurant sign, restaurant signage, restaurant text, roof sign, sauce packet, self-order kiosk branding, shirt logo, signage, signature burger, signature colors, slogan text, staff uniform, staff uniform logo, store name text, store number, store sign, store signage, storefront sign, storefront signage, storefront text, sub-brand logo, tagline, tagline text, tray liner, tray liners, uniform, uniform branding, uniform logo, uniforms, wall sign, wall signage, wall text, window decal, window decals, window signage, window text, wrapper design, wrapper text 

Concepts 6. awning text, beverage machine branding, bill-board, brand colors, brand name, brand pattern, brand sign, brand slogan, brand symbol, brand text, branded bag, branded colors, branded flag, branded packaging, building signage, burger icon, burger image, cafe branding, cafe sign, character makeup, chinese text, counter signage, coupon, cup design, delivery scooter branding, digital screens, door text, drink cup, drink cup logo, drink cups, drive-thru sign, employee uniform, flag text, food advertisement, food container, food icons, food item name, food packaging, food poster, food text, food wrap-per, fries icon, fries image, fry carton, golden arches, hat logo, hours sign, interior decor, item names, kiosk screen, location text, logo, map, mascot, mascot costume, mccafe sign, mccafé sign, meal names, menu board, menu boards, menu branding, menu flyer, menu item name, menu item names, menu item text, menu items, menu photos, menu placemat, menu poster, menu screen, menu sign, menu text, name tag, order display, packaging, packaging design, paper bag, paper bags, payment terminal, pickup counter, poster, price text, product name, pro-motional poster, promotional sign, promotional text, receipt, receipt text, restaurant branding, restaurant colors, restau-rant entrance, restaurant facade, restaurant interior, restau-rant name, restaurant sign, restaurant signage, roadside sign, sauce packet, self-order kiosk, sign, slogan, store directory, store locations, store number, store sign, storefront, storefront branding, storefront logo, storefront sign, storefront signage, storefront text, text, tray liner, uniform, uniform emblem, uni-form logo, wall graphics, wall sign, wall signage, wall text, website text, welcome message, window decal, window de-cals, window graphics, window posters, window text, wrapper, wrapper text 

Concepts 7. advertisement, architectural feature, billboard, brand colors, brand name, brand pattern, brand symbol, branded packaging, food packaging, logo, mascot, mascot costume, menu board, menu items, menu text, name tag, pack-aging, packaging design, product name, promotional text, re-ceipt, restaurant sign, sign, slogan, store sign, storefront sign, text, uniform, uniform logo, wall graphics 

Concepts 8. arches symbol, architectural arches, awning, banner, beverage brand, beverage dispenser logo, brand color, brand color scheme, brand mascot, brand name, brand name text, brand sign, brand symbol, brand text, branded bag, branded cap, branded clothing, branded cup, branded decor, branded lanyard, branded packaging, branded shirt, branded text, branded uniform, branded wrapper, building design, building sign, building signage, burger box, burger wrapper, cafe sign, character figure, chicken box, chinese text, clown costume, clown figure, color scheme, coupon, cup de-sign, digital signage, directional signage, drink cup, drink 

17 dispenser, drive thru sign, drive-through sign, drive-thru sign, employee uniform, flag, food imagery, food wrapper, fry con-tainer, golden arches, hat logo, illuminated sign, interior decor, letter emblem, logo, mascot costume, mascot statue, menu board, menu display, menu item names, menu item text, menu items, name badge, operating hours sign, order display, order screen, order screens, packaging, packaging text, play area sign, playground structure, pole sign, poster, price signage, product name, promotional banner, promotional poster, pro-motional posters, promotional sign, promotional signage, re-ceipt, red wig, roadside sign, sandwich wrapper, sauce packet, self-order kiosk, shirt logo, shop address, sign, signage text, slogan, storefront sign, storefront text, striped sleeves, text, text signage, trademark symbol, tray liner, uniform, uniform logo, wall text, website text, welcome text, window decal, wrapper text, yellow jumpsuit 

Concepts 9. awning branding, billboard, brand character, brand colors, brand icon, brand logo, brand name, brand sign, brand text, combo meal names, decor pattern, drink cup, drive-thru sign, food box, food packaging, french fry carton, fry carton, golden arches, hat logo, logo, mascot costume, mascot makeup, menu board, menu item names, menu poster, menu text, packaging, packaging logo, playground branding, prices, promotional display, promotional poster, receipt, restaurant interior, restaurant sign, restaurant signage, restaurant text, slogan, storefront sign, storefront text, text, uniform, uniform logo, wall signage, window decal, wrapper text 

Concepts 10. architectural feature, brand name, branded packaging, logo, mascot costume, menu board, menu item name, menu item names, name tag, promotional, restaurant sign, sign, slogan, store sign, uniform logo 

Concepts 11. architectural arches, awning, banner, bever-age brand, brand color scheme, brand mascot, brand name, brand symbol, brand text, branded cap, branded cup, branded packaging, branded shirt, branded uniform, building design, building sign, burger box, chicken box, clown costume, color scheme, drink cup, drink dispenser, drive-through sign, food wrapper, fry container, golden arches, hat logo, interior decor, logo, mascot costume, menu board, menu boards, menu item names, name badge, packaging text, playground structure, pole sign, product name, promotional banner, promotional posters, promotional signage, receipt, red wig, sign, slogan, storefront sign, striped sleeves, tray liner, uniform logo, win-dow decal, yellow jumpsuit 

Concepts 12. arches, clown, drink, face, food, logo, roof, sign, vent 

Concepts 13. comic, movie, publisher, author, superhero, ab-breviation, archetype, year, “remake”, “blockbuster”, “bat-tle”, “first”, “powerful”, “defeated”, “movies”, “die” 

# E Obfuscation Prompts 

Prompt 4. Black out all regions containing: OBJECTS . The blacked-out regions must be solid black. Do not alter any other pixels. When the blacked-out object can be recognized by silhouette alone, blur the edges to ensure it cannot be recognized. 

Prompt 5. Black out all regions in this image that can reveal 

CONCEPT . The blacked-out regions must be solid black. Do not alter any other pixels. When the blacked-out object can be recognized by silhouette alone, blur the edges to ensure it cannot be recognized. 

Prompt 6. Analyze this image and identify specific concepts (objects, text, visual elements) that should be obfuscated to preserve the privacy of the following target concept: 

CONCEPT . Please provide a list of general, reusable concepts that appear in this image and would reveal information about the target concept if left visible. Use general, broad concepts whenever possible (e.g., "logo" instead of "McDonald’s logo", "sign" instead of "Joe’s Restaurant sign", "menu" instead of "specific menu item names"). Return ONLY a JSON array of concept strings, one per line, with no additional text or explanation. Each concept should be a single word or short phrase (2-3 words maximum). Focus on concepts that are di-rectly related to revealing the target concept. Example format: ["logo", "sign", "menu", "brand name", "text"] If no relevant concepts are found, return an empty array: [] 

Prompt 7. Please redact the following passage by replac-ing with a single block character ( , Unicode U+2588) ev-ery word or phrase that is consistent with this privacy con-cept: anything that can identify the movie discussed in this passage . Rules: (1) Replace only the sensitive tokens with , one character per original character so that the length and layout of the passage are pre-served. (2) Do not redact words that do not match the concept. (3) Return only the redacted passage, no explanation. 

18 F Privatizations 

(a) Unaltered images capturing McDon-ald’s. 

(b) Images obfuscated by iGPT15/GPT54 

achieving contrastive privacy resolution 0.05 and utility 0.63. 

(c) Images obfuscated by SAM3/Manual 

achieving contrastive privacy at resolution 0 and utility 0.46. 

Figure 10: An attempt to sanitize the concept the identity of the fast food restaurant from a collection of nine images capturing the brand McDonald’s. 

(a) Unaltered images capturing the McDonald’s brand. (b) Images with Concepts 5 obfuscated by iGPT15 achieving con-trastive privacy at resolution 0.17. 

Figure 12: A privatized collection of 49 images depicting the McDonald’s restaurant. Resolutions are calculated using the EVA 

distance mechanism. 19 G Privacy Failures      

> Model GPT54 GEM31p OPS46 Manual None
> iGPT15
> iGPT1m
> iGEM3p
> iGEM31f
> FLX2p
> FLX2d
> SAM3

Figure 13: The most significant privacy failures for 30 images capturing Leonardo DiCaprio and sanitizing the abstract concept 

the identity of the celebrities . Empty cells indicate that the mechanism achieved contrastive privacy at resolution 0 according to distance mechanism EVA .20 Model GPT54 GEM31p OPS46 Manual None 

iGPT15 

iGPT1m 

iGEM3p 

iGEM31f 

FLX2p 

FLX2d 

SAM3 

Figure 14: The most significant privacy failures for 49 images capturing the McDonald’s brand and sanitizing the abstract concept 

the identity of the fast food restaurant .21