Title: Privacy-preserving Meta-analysis through Low-Rank Basis Hunting

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.23847v1

Published Time: Tue, 28 Apr 2026 01:15:02 GMT

Number of Pages: 60

Markdown Content:
# Privacy-preserving Meta-analysis through Low-Rank Basis Hunting 

## Wenqi Shi ∗ Kosuke Imai † Yi Zhang ‡

Abstract 

A central challenge of meta-analysis is that the populations underlying existing studies often differ from the target population in unknown ways. We study the problem of predict-ing function-valued quantities, such as regression and conditional average treatment effect functions, for a new target population using only study-level covariates and estimates. We propose MetaHunt , a new meta-analysis methodology based on a shared low-rank struc-ture, in which the true function from each study lies within the convex hull of a small set of latent basis functions. To recover these basis functions, we extend the Successive Projec-tion Algorithm to the functional setting, incorporating a denoised basis-hunting step. We establish consistency of the recovered basis functions under mild regularity conditions. We then model the relationship between study-level covariates and the corresponding mixing weights using flexible semi-parametric or non-parametric methods. MetaHunt is privacy-preserving and enables meta-analytic prediction based on study-level information alone, even when individual-level data are unavailable to analysts. In addition, for each study, functions of interest can be estimated using possibly different machine learning algorithms. For uncertainty quantification, we construct prediction intervals via conformal prediction. We show that, under exchangeability and mild estimation-error conditions, these inter-vals achieve asymptotically valid marginal coverage. We demonstrate the effectiveness of MetaHunt through both simulation studies and empirical applications. 

Keywords: conformal prediction; external validity; generalizability; vertex hunting 

> ∗

Department of Statistics, Harvard University, 1 Oxford Street, Cambridge, MA 02138, U.S.A. Email: wenqi_shi@g.harvard.edu 

> †

Department of Government and Department of Statistics, Harvard University. 1737 Cambridge Street, Institute for Quantitative Social Science, Cambridge MA 02138, U.S.A. Email: imai@harvard.edu URL: https://imai.fas.harvard.edu 

> ‡

Independent Researcher. Email: yizhang0017@gmail.com 

1

> arXiv:2604.23847v1 [stat.ME] 26 Apr 2026

# 1 Introduction 

Modern scientific research is increasingly characterized by studies conducted across diverse pop-ulations, contexts, and designs. Integrating information from such heterogeneous sources is essential for assessing the external validity of empirical evidence. Meta-analysis provides a foun-dational framework for synthesizing evidence across studies and has been widely applied in a variety of fields including medicine, social sciences, and public policy [e.g., Hedges and Olkin, 1985, Normand, 1999, Haidich, 2010, Card, 2015, Cooper et al., 2019, Tipton et al., 2019]. However, generalizing results from multiple source studies to a new target population is challenging, especially when there exists substantial heterogeneity both across sources and be-tween the source and target populations. This heterogeneity extends beyond simple covariate shift to include conditional shifts, where outcome–covariate relationships vary across studies in unknown ways. While classical meta-analytic methods typically focus on scalar estimands such as average treatment effects, many contemporary applications require learning about richer, function-valued objects, including regression and conditional average treatment effect (CATE) functions. Moreover, once these functional quantities are estimated, they can be used to infer scalar estimands. In this paper, we consider the problem of predicting a function-valued quantity for a new target population using only aggregate-level data from multiple source studies. In our setting, each source study provides an estimated function of interest together with study-level covariates that summarize contextual features such as location, timing, and other aspects of study design. Crucially, we do not assume access to individual-level covariates or outcomes, reflecting common practical constraints in multi-site studies. Our goal is to predict the corresponding function for a new target population that is also characterized by the same set of study-level covariates. We seek a structured but flexible approach to modeling cross-study heterogeneity that enables principled generalization using only aggregate-level information. We develop MetaHunt , a unified estimation and inference framework for predicting function-valued quantities across heterogeneous studies. MetaHunt is built on a low-rank structural assumption, which posits that all study-level functions lie in the convex hull of a small set of latent basis functions. This assumption captures cross-study heterogeneity through a low-dimensional representation and enables information sharing across studies without imposing parametric restrictions on the functions themselves. The intuition is that heterogeneity across studies is driven by a small number of persistent mechanisms. Study-level covariates then inform how these latent bases are combined differently across studies and in the target population. To estimate the latent basis functions, we extend the Successive Projection Algorithm (SPA) [Araújo et al., 2001] from the vertex-hunting to functional setting. The proposed functional 2SPA (fSPA) algorithm adapts a denoising step from Jin et al. [2024b] to improve robustness, along with data-driven procedures for selecting the number of basis functions. Given the bases recovered by this denoised fSPA (d-fSPA) algorithm, we estimate study-specific mixing weights by projecting each observed function onto the resulting convex hull. Lastly, we model the relationship between these weights and study-level covariates using flexible semi-parametric or nonparametric methods, allowing covariate information from the target population to inform prediction. The combination of recovered basis functions and the fitted weight model yields a predicted target function. To quantify uncertainty, we construct conformal prediction intervals [Vovk et al., 2005, Shafer and Vovk, 2008], which accommodate the multi-stage estimation pipeline without requiring distributional assumptions. All together, 

MetaHunt is privacy-preserving, while remaining compatible with modern machine learning methods for estimating study-level functions and fitting weight models. Our theoretical analysis establishes consistency guarantees for the recovered basis functions under mild regularity conditions. To our knowledge, this work is the first to extend vertex-hunting algorithms to the functional setting. For uncertainty quantification, we show that the proposed conformal prediction intervals achieve distribution-free asymptotic marginal coverage under exchangeability and mild control of estimation error, despite the complexity of the un-derlying estimation procedure. Through extensive simulation studies and a real-world empirical application, we demonstrate that MetaHunt provides robust prediction and valid uncertainty quantification. 

Related Literature 

Classical meta-analytic approaches typically focus on scalar estimands, most notably the average treatment effects (ATE). For function-valued quantities of interest, including the CATE, many widely used methods are based on parametric models such as mixed-effects or hierarchical models [e.g., Hedges and Olkin, 1985, Higgins et al., 2009, Lunn et al., 2013, Debray et al., 2015, Burke et al., 2017, Borenstein et al., 2021, Seo et al., 2021, Stogiannis et al., 2024]. While these hierarchical formulations allow CATE functions to vary across studies through parametric random effects, their primary estimands remain scalar ATEs. Moreover, such approaches require access to individual-level data and rely on strong parametric assumptions. When cross-study heterogeneity is complex or nonlinear, these methods are susceptible to bias due to model misspecification. In addition, while aggregate-level meta-analytic approaches, including meta-regression, do not require individual-level information [e.g., Baker et al., 2009, Tipton et al., 2019], they are typically limited to scalar quantities and do not directly accommodate function-valued estimands. In contrast, MetaHunt targets function-valued quantities and allows the use of any flexible machine learning algorithm to estimate study-specific functions. 3More recent work on causally interpretable meta-analysis emphasizes principled generaliza-tion to a well-defined target population, but often restricts attention to covariate shift and assumes transportability, namely the invariance of CATE functions across studies [e.g., Da-habreh et al., 2020, Clark et al., 2023, Dahabreh et al., 2023, Rott et al., 2024, Steingrimsson et al., 2024, Vo et al., 2025, Cao and Yang, 2025, Shi and Zubizarreta, 2025]. In practice, however, transportability is often not credible because of various unobserved sources of cross-study heterogeneity. MetaHunt departs from these approaches by allowing CATE functions to vary across studies in unknown ways without imposing parametric restrictions on the functions themselves. Another stream of literature that aggregates evidence from multiple datasets is federated learning. Federated learning, introduced by McMahan et al. [2017], emphasizes privacy-preserving collaborative model training, in which multiple decentralized sites (e.g., devices or institutions) jointly learn a model by sharing only summary-level information rather than individual-level data [Li et al., 2020, Kairouz et al., 2021]. This paradigm has been increasingly applied in healthcare informatics, finance and industrial systems [e.g. Silva et al., 2019, Rieke et al., 2020, Long et al., 2020, Li et al., 2020, Xu et al., 2021, Antunes et al., 2022]. MetaHunt offers a new aggregation method by modeling each study-level function as a convex combination of latent basis functions. While most existing work on federated causal inference relies on propensity-score-based adjustments and focuses primarily on covariate shift [e.g., Han et al., 2023, Xiong et al., 2023a, Han et al., 2025], MetaHunt allows the conditional relationship between treat-ment effects and covariates to vary flexibly across studies. Our low-rank assumption is related to the distributionally robust optimization (DRO) liter-ature, which studies decision-making under distributional uncertainty by optimizing worst-case performance over an uncertainty set [e.g., Ben-Tal et al., 2013, Duchi et al., 2021, Zhang et al., 2024b]. Recent meta-analytic work models the target population as a convex combination of source-study distributions [e.g., Xiong et al., 2023b, Zhang et al., 2024a, Wang et al., 2025, Mo et al., 2024]. Although this formulation is structurally similar to our low-rank assumption, the objectives and modeling choices differ in important ways. DRO methods focus on worst-case guarantees and are therefore driven primarily by source studies with extreme results. In par-ticular, studies whose results lie within the convex hull of results from other source studies do not affect the solution. While this worst-case perspective offers strong robustness guarantees, it can be overly conservative in many practical applications. In contrast, MetaHunt models the distribution of mixing weights, allowing all source studies to contribute meaningfully through their frequency and covariate patterns. Relatedly, Jeong and Rothenhäusler [2024] studies out-of-distribution prediction by approximating the target distribution as a weighted combination of source distributions through a random perturbation model. While their model is defined 4on the unconditional joint distribution, our low-rank assumption restricts only the conditional relationships between outcomes and predictors. To the best of our knowledge, this work is the first to extend vertex-hunting algorithms to the functional setting. Vertex hunting has been studied extensively in finite-dimensional settings and arises in a wide range of applications, including hyperspectral unmixing [e.g., Bioucas-Dias et al., 2012], archetypal analysis [e.g., Cutler and Breiman, 1994, Satija et al., 2015], network membership estimation [e.g., Rubin-Delanchy et al., 2022, Huang et al., 2018, Jin et al., 2024a], and topic modeling [e.g., Ke and Wang, 2024]. Existing methods in these areas focus on recover-ing vertices from finite-dimensional vectors. In contrast, our work extends the classical SPA to infinite-dimensional functional data. Our approach builds on prior work that improves the ro-bustness of SPA to noise [Mizutani and Tanaka, 2018, Gillis and Vavasis, 2015, Jin et al., 2024b], as well as studies establishing finite-sample error bounds for SPA [Gillis and Vavasis, 2013, Jin et al., 2024b]. Leveraging these developments, we derive error bounds for the recovered basis functions under mild regularity conditions in the functional setting. While our proof strategy follows Jin et al. [2024b], extending their analysis from finite-dimensional vectors to functions requires re-deriving several key geometric inequalities in this functional setting. Notably, the denoising step in the d-fSPA algorithm is not strictly required for consistency, but substantially improves finite-sample performance in practice. 

MetaHunt also contributes to the literature on conformal prediction in meta-analytic and multi-population settings. Foundational work on conformal prediction established distribution-free predictive inference under exchangeability [Vovk et al., 2005, Shafer and Vovk, 2008]. More recent developments have extended conformal methods to causal inference, producing intervals for counterfactual quantities [e.g., Lei and Candès, 2021, Jin et al., 2023, Alaa et al., 2023]. In parallel, several recent papers study conformal prediction in hierarchical or multi-population set-tings [Andrews et al., 2022, Dunn et al., 2023, Liu et al., 2024], but rely on access to individual-level data from source studies. In contrast, MetaHunt operates entirely on aggregate-level study summaries while focusing on a two-layer hierarchical data generation structure. Un-der mild estimation error control and regularity conditions, we establish asymptotic marginal coverage guarantees for the proposed prediction intervals, providing a practical alternative for uncertainty quantification when individual-level data are unavailable. 

# 2 The Setup and Assumptions 

We consider a setting motivated by aggregate-data meta-analysis, in which multiple studies provide estimated functions that capture site-specific predictive relationships. While a common example is the study of conditional average treatment effects (CATEs) across sites, our formu-5lation applies more broadly. Rather than restricting attention to causal estimands, we treat this as a general function-valued prediction problem, where each study contributes an estimated function summarizing its local relationship between covariates and outcomes. Our objective is to leverage these study-specific estimates to predict the corresponding function in a new target population that may differ in its study-level characteristics. Formally, suppose there exist m source studies indexed by i = 1 , . . . , m . Each study i

provides an estimated function ˆf (i)(x) : X → R, which may represent, for instance, a site-specific CATE function, a dose–response curve, or any other predictive object of interest. Associated with each study is a vector of study-level covariates Wi ∈ W ⊆ Rp, summarizing contextual characteristics such as region, study design, or population composition. Let ni denote the sample size of study i, let n := Pmi=1 ni denote the total number of observations across all studies, and let nmin := min 1≤i≤m ni denote the smallest within-study sample size. Our goal is to predict the corresponding function f (0) (x) for a new target population i =0 characterized by covariates W0, using the collection of observed pairs {(Wi, ˆf (i)(x)) }mi=1 .Throughout, we treat the observed functions ˆf (i)(x) as noisy estimates of the underlying or-acle functions f (i)(x), i.e., ˆf (i)(x) = f (i)(x) + ϵ(i)(x), where ϵ(i)(x) represents estimation error within study i. We do not require any access to individual-level data from source distribution or the target population. We view the studies as exchangeable units drawn from a common data-generating process, and focus on pointwise prediction for fixed covariate values x ∈ X .Our goal is to learn shared structure across the m studies that enables accurate out-of-sample prediction of f (0) (x) for new study-level covariate W0.

## 2.1 Low-rank assumption 

We propose the low-rank cross-study heterogeneity assumption to capture the shared structure underlying study-level oracle functions f (i)(x). Although studies may differ in complex and un-observed ways, we assume that their study-level functions share a common underlying structure captured by a small number of latent basis functions. This assumption reduces the complexity of cross-study heterogeneity and enables us to recover a shared functional representation from the aggregate data. 

Assumption 1 (Low-rank cross-study heterogeneity) . There exists a set of basis functions 

{gk(x)}Kk=1 such that 

f (i)(x) = 

> K

X

> k=1

πik gk(x), ∀x ∈ X ,

for all i = 0 , 1, . . . , m where K < m , and the weights satisfy πi = ( πi1, . . . , π iK )⊤ ∈ ∆K−1 with 

6∆K−1 = {π ∈ RK : PKk=1 πk = 1 , min k πk ≥ 0} denoting the (K − 1) -dimensional simplex. Moreover, the basis functions are non-degenerate: the differences g2 − g1, g 3 − g1, . . . , g K − g1

are linearly independent in L2(μ) for a probability measure μ on X .

Assumption 1 states that each study-level oracle function f (i)(x) can be expressed as a convex combination of a shared collection of latent basis functions {gk(x)}Kk=1 . Geometrically, this means that all study-specific functions and the target function lie within the convex hull spanned by these basis functions. The coefficients πik represent the study-specific mixture weights that characterize each study’s position within this functional simplex, summarizing how much each latent basis function gk(·) contributes to the predictive mechanism of study i. In this sense, the basis functions capture the fundamental “treatment effect patterns,” which are combined by different studies in varying proportions. The non-degeneracy condition ensures that no basis function can be expressed as an affine combination of the others under the L2(μ) norm, so that the convex hull is a genuine (K − 1) -dimensional simplex and each basis function is identifiable. The probability measure μ is the same as the one used to define the functional norm in the consistency result (Section 3.2). This assumption parallels structures commonly used in archetypal analysis and topic mod-eling, where observations are expressed as convex combinations of a few latent archetypes or topics. Our assumption 1 can be viewed as a functional analogue of these finite-dimensional decompositions. In all such cases, a shared low-dimensional structure explains the variation ob-served across many high-dimensional objects, enabling efficient representation, interpretation, and generalization. Our decomposition shares a high-level structure with classical functional representations such as Fourier expansions and functional principal component analysis (fPCA) [Ramsay and Silver-man, 2005, Hsing and Eubank, 2015]. All express functions as combinations of basis functions. However, Fourier bases are fixed and universal, whereas fPCA bases, though data-driven, are orthogonal eigenfunctions of the covariance operator chosen to maximize explained variance. In contrast, the basis functions in MetaHunt are data-driven and generally non-orthogonal, recovered as vertices of a convex hull. The central distinction is the simplex constraint on the mixing weights, which makes the weights πik as membership proportions characterizing the degree to which study i resembles each basis. A closely related but distinct formulation arises in the distributionally robust optimization (DRO) literature. Recent work, such as Xiong et al. [2023b] and Zhang et al. [2024a], defines an uncertainty set where the target function is expressed as a convex combination of the source-study functions, i.e., {f (0) (x) = Pmi=1 qif (i)(x), q ∈ ∆m−1}. While this setup is structurally similar, MetaHunt differs in that the feasible convex hull of the target function is defined by a fixed set of latent basis functions, rather than by the observed source studies themselves. 7The number of bases K does not grow with the number of studies m. Instead, these basis functions capture the common underlying structure that persists as new studies are added. This perspective emphasizes representation learning by identifying a shared generative structure, rather than expanding mixtures over an ever-growing set of empirical studies. 

## 2.2 Weight model 

Assumption 1 specifies the shared low-rank structure for study-level functions. We now describe how the corresponding mixing weights πi vary across studies. These weights determine how each study combines the latent basis functions {gk(x)}Kk=1 to form its oracle function f (i)(x). Since studies are conducted under different conditions, characterized by covariates such as region, time period, or experimental design, we allow the weights πi to depend flexibly on the study-level covariates Wi.

Assumption 2 (Weight model) . For all i ∈ { 0, 1, . . . , m }, the weight vector πi is drawn inde-pendently from a conditional distribution 

πi | Wiind. 

∼ Pπ|W (· | Wi),

where Pπ|W denotes an arbitrary distributional map from the covariate space W to the simplex 

∆K−1.

Assumption 2 treats the weight-generating process as a stochastic mechanism linking study-level covariates to the composition of the underlying basis functions. This flexible, nonparametric formulation allows the distribution of πi to vary with Wi, enabling the model to capture poten-tially complex patterns of heterogeneity across studies. In practice, the conditional distribution 

Pπ|W can be further specified using additional parametric or semiparametric assumptions to en-hance interpretability or estimation efficiency, especially when the number of studies is limited. A flexible and principled extension is to replace the linear predictor in standard Dirichlet regression with a function that lies in a reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS). This leads to a kernelized generalization of Dirichlet regression (Example 1). Such a formulation preserves the Dirichlet simplex constraint while accommodating nonlinear relationships between Wi and the study-level weights πi. Kernelized Dirichlet models inherit the computational tractability of classical Dirichlet regression, while providing a semiparametric representation that can adapt to complex patterns of cross-study heterogeneity. 

Example 1 (Kernelized Dirichlet regression model) . Let κ : W × W → R be a positive–definite kernel with associated reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS) Hκ and feature map ψ : W → 

8Hκ. For all i ∈ { 0, 1, . . . , m }, assume 

πi := ( πi1, π i2, . . . , π iK ) ∼ Dirichlet( αi1, α i2, . . . , α iK ), (1) 

with αik = exp ⟨βk, ψ (Wi)⟩Hκ and βk ∈ H κ for all k.

Another approach to avoid the simplex constraint on the weights is to model their log-ratios [Aitchison, 1982]. Log-ratio transformations provide an unconstrained representation of simplex-valued data and are widely used in compositional analysis. Under this formulation, the dependence of the weights on study-level covariates is modeled through a regression for the log of the relative weights, which can then be mapped back to the simplex via a softmax-type transformation. This specification preserves the interpretability of log-ratio models while allowing nonlinear covariate effects through RKHS regularization. Example 2 illustrates this kernelized log-ratio regression framework. 

Example 2 (Kernelized log–ratio regression) . For each k ∈ { 2, . . . , K }, define the log-ratio 

ηik := log( πik /π i1). For all i ∈ { 0, 1, . . . , m }, assume 

ηik = ⟨γk, ψ (Wi)⟩Hκ , γk ∈ H κ. (2) The low-rank structure (Assumption 1) and the weight model (Assumption 2) together pro-vide a unified and interpretable representation for study-level functions. The low-rank structure captures a shared set of latent basis functions that summarize cross-study variation, while the weight model explains heterogeneity by characterizing how different studies combine these bases according to their covariates. This joint formulation enables generalization to new target popula-tions and reduces the effective dimensionality of the problem. Moreover, since both components are nonparametric, the framework retains the flexibility to capture complex, nonlinear patterns of heterogeneity while preserving interpretability through its low-rank decomposition. 

Assumption 3 (Exchangeability) . The site-level covariates W0, W1, . . . , Wm are exchangeable. 

Assumption 3 assumes that the site-level covariates are exchangeable. Combined with As-sumption 1– 2, this implies that (Wi, πi, f (i)) are jointly exchangeable across i = 0 , 1, . . . , m .This exchangeability property underlies the validity of our conformal prediction procedure in Section 4. 

# 3 Estimation through Low-rank Basis Hunting 

This section describes the estimation procedure. We first consider the recovery of the latent basis functions {gk(x)}Kk=1 that define the shared low-dimensional structure underlying the study-9specific functions. We then discuss how to determine the number of basis functions K in practice. Finally, given the estimated bases, we fit the weight model to estimate the study-specific mixing weights πi as functions of the study-level covariates Wi. Together, these steps yield an estimated representation of study-specific functions and enable prediction for the target population. 

## 3.1 Basis hunting via the d-fSPA algorithm 

In this section, we extend the successive projection algorithm (SPA) from the vertex hunting setting to recover the latent basis functions {gk(x)}Kk=1 . We call our extension the functional successive projection (fSPA) algorithm. The low-rank assumption implies that each study-level function f (i)(x) can be expressed as a convex combination of a small number of basis functions, placing our task in close analogy to the classical vertex hunting problem. In vertex hunting, each observed vector is modeled as a convex combination of a finite set of vertices plus noise, and the goal is to recover these vertices from noisy samples. This problem arises in a wide range of applications, including hyperspectral unmixing, archetypal analysis, network membership estimation, and topic modeling. Our setting differs from these applications in one important respect: instead of finite-dimensional vectors, our “observations” are functions, and the latent vertices are infinite-dimensional basis functions. The SPA of Araújo et al. [2001] is a simple yet powerful method for vertex hunting. It is a stepwise greedy procedure that repeatedly selects the observation with the largest norm after projecting out previously chosen directions. The algorithm is computationally efficient, requires no explicit objective function, and has desirable theoretical guarantees. We adopt SPA in our functional setting for two key reasons. First, SPA selects basis elements directly from the observed functions, thereby avoiding the challenge of representing an arbitrary function in a high-dimensional function space. Second, the core argument underlying SPA, namely the triangle inequality, extends naturally to function norms, allowing the algorithm’s intuition to carry over to our infinite-dimensional context. However, SPA is a greedy procedure and can be sensitive to noise and outliers. In particular, SPA tends to select points that fall outside the underlying convex hull. This outward bias arises because noisy observations may have large norms and thus are more likely to be selected by the algorithm. To address this, it is natural to introduce a denoising step before applying SPA. Following the approach of Jin et al. [2024b], we extend their denoising strategy to our functional setting. The resulting denoised fSPA (d-fSPA) algorithm, presented in Algorithm 1, provides a more robust method for basis hunting under noisy functional observations. Here, we define 

B∆( ˆf (i)) := {f : ∥f − ˆf (i)∥ ≤ ∆} to be the ∆-neighborhood of ˆf (i).10 Algorithm 1: The d-fSPA Algorithm for basis hunting 

Input: Estimated functions from m studies { ˆf (i)(·)}mi=1 ; estimated number of basis ˆK;tuning parameters (N, ∆) .

Denoising step: 

1. If there are fewer than N functions in B∆( ˆf (i)), remove this function. 2. Otherwise, replace ˆf (i) by the average of all functions in B∆( ˆf (i)).

Initialize S = ∅, hi(·) = ˆf (i)(·) for 1 ≤ i ≤ m

for k = 1 , . . . , ˆK do 

1. Project hi onto the orthogonal space of span( S): hi = hi − Pspan( S)hi.2. Find sk such that hsk has the largest norm sk = arg max i ∥hi∥.3. Update the set S = S ∪ { ˆf (sk )}.

Output: Estimated basis functions ˆgk(·) = ˆf (sk ) for 1 ≤ k ≤ ˆK.The d-fSPA algorithm includes a denoising step and a successive projection step. The denois-ing step reduces the influence of noise by locally averaging functions within a ∆-neighborhood and discarding functions that lack sufficient nearby support. The tuning parameters (N, ∆) can be selected by cross-validation. In our numerical studies, following the recommendations of Jin et al. [2024b], we use the heuristic choices N = 0 .5 log m and ∆ = max ij ∥ ˆf (i) − ˆf (j)∥/10 . After denoising, the d-fSPA algorithm proceeds iteratively: at each step, the algorithm projects all remaining functions onto the orthogonal complement of the span of previously selected bases, and then selects the function with the largest residual norm. Intuitively, this residual norm identifies the direction that introduces the greatest new variation, corresponding to an extreme point of the underlying simplex. The final output consists of ˆK selected functions that best capture the extreme structure implied by the low-rank assumption. For the functional norm used in Algorithm 1, we allow any norm on the relevant function space. In practice, we recommend the L2 norm with respect to a probability measure μ on X ,i.e., ∥f − ˜f ∥ = {R (f (x) − ˜f (x)) 2 dμ (x)}1/2. A natural choice is the covariate distribution of the target population, μ = P0,X , which emphasizes accuracy in the regions of the covariate space most relevant to the target. If P0,X is unavailable, one may instead use the pooled covariate distribution from the source studies as a proxy. For the consistency guarantee established in Section 3.2, we restrict to the L2(μ) norm. In many applications, study-specific functions ˆf (i) are estimated using black-box machine learning methods and therefore lack a closed analytical form. In such cases, the L2 norm can be approximated empirically: draw individual-level covariate samples, evaluate the corresponding predictions, and compute the empirical analogue of the above expectation. This approxima-tion provides a practical and reliable way to measure functional distances when only sampled covariate values and black-box estimators are available. 11 3.2 Consistency of basis recovery 

We establish the consistency of the estimated basis functions {ˆgk} ˆKk=1 produced by the d-fSPA algorithm. The consistency result requires two conditions: one controlling the within-study estimation error and another ensuring that the observed studies are sufficiently diverse to ap-proximate each vertex of the simplex. The first condition controls the within-study estimation error. Recall that ϵ(i)(x) := ˆf (i)(x)−

f (i)(x) denotes the estimation error for study i. In most meta-analyses, the number of studies 

m is moderate, so we require only that the within-study estimation error is well-controlled as the study-level sample sizes ni grow. 

Assumption 4 (Estimation error conditions) . We assume the following conditions: (a) sup x∈X E[ϵ(i)(x)2] = O(n−ri ) for some r > 0 and all i.(b) There exists a constant 0 < a < r s.t. m = o(inf i nai ).

Assumption 4(a) requires the mean squared estimation error to vanish uniformly over the covariate space X as the within-study sample sizes grow. Many meta-learner and machine-learning estimators satisfy this condition. For parametric estimators, we typically have r = 1 .For non-parametric or machine-learning estimators (e.g., random forests [Wager and Athey, 2018]; doubly-robust estimators [Kennedy, 2023]; local polynomial estimators [Kennedy et al., 2024]; X-learner [Künzel et al., 2019]), the rate r depends on underlying smoothness conditions and is usually slightly below 1. Assumption 4(b) ensures that the number of studies does not grow too fast relative to the within-study sample sizes. Together, these conditions imply that the estimation error is uniformly small across all studies with probability tending to one. The second condition controls the degree of purity among the observed studies. Since the d-fSPA algorithm recovers basis functions by selecting from the observed studies, its accuracy depends on having studies that lie sufficiently close to each vertex of the simplex. 

Assumption 5 (Approximate purity condition) . For each k = 1 , . . . , K and η > 0, define the near-pure count Mk(η) := |{ 1 ≤ i ≤ m : πik ≥ 1 − η}| . There exists a sequence δm s.t. 

δm max 1≤k≤K ∥gk∥ = o(1) and min 1≤k≤K Mk(δm) ≥ 1.

Assumption 5 requires that for each basis function gk, at least one study has its weight predominantly concentrated on gk, with the approximation error δm vanishing as m grows. When δm = 0 , there exists a pure study for every basis function, i.e., a study i with πi = ek

for each k, corresponding to the pure node condition commonly assumed in the vertex-hunting literature [e.g., Gillis and Vavasis, 2013, Jin et al., 2024b]. Assumption 5 relaxes this by requiring only approximate purity. 12 Whether this condition holds generally depends on the weight model in Assumption 2. For instance, a weight distribution that places non-negligible mass near each vertex of the simplex (e.g., a Dirichlet model with suitable concentration parameters) ensures that near-pure studies emerge as m grows, whereas weights tightly concentrated away from the vertices may violate the condition even for large m. More generally, the near-pure count Mk(δm) characterizes how many studies lie near each vertex at the resolution δm; this quantity plays a role in the choice of denoising parameters for the d-fSPA algorithm. With these two conditions, we establish the following consistency guarantee. 

Theorem 1 (Consistency of d-fSPA) . Suppose ∥·∥ is the L2(μ) norm. Under Assumptions 1, 4, and 5, with an appropriate choice of the denoising parameters (N, ∆) , we have, up to permuta-tion, 

max  

> 1≤k≤min( K, ˆK)

∥ˆgk − gk∥ = oP (1) .

When ˆK = K, Theorem 1 states that all K estimated basis functions converge to the true basis functions, up to permutation. When ˆK > K , only the first K of the recovered bases are guaranteed to be consistent for the true basis functions. Our proof extends the consistency analysis of Jin et al. [2024b] from the finite-dimensional setting to the functional setting. The overall strategy is the same as we first establish a finite-sample error bound, and then show that this bound vanishes under our assumptions. However, moving from vectors to functions requires re-deriving several key geometric inequalities in the functional setting. A notable feature of our analysis is that the denoising step is not strictly required for consistency. In this sense, the estimation error is controlled by Assumption 4 rather than by the denoising step. Nevertheless, we find that the denoising step is valuable in practice. Our numerical studies show that it reduces finite-sample basis recovery error, particularly when 

m is moderate or when within-study estimation error is non-negligible. An appropriate choice of (N, ∆) depends on the purity level δm and the within-study estima-tion error rate, and therefore implicitly on the weight model and estimation error. Intuitively, the neighborhood radius ∆ should be large enough that near-vertex studies cluster together and are not mistakenly pruned, while the pruning threshold N should scale with the number of near-pure studies expected at each vertex. Under the kernelized Dirichlet weight model (Example 1), for instance, the expected number of near-pure studies at each vertex satisfies Mk(δm) ≍ m δ K−1 

> m

,leading to the choices N ≍ log m and ∆ ≍ (log m/m )1/(K−1) + n(a−r)/2min . Explicit formulas and derivations are given in the Appendix (Section A.1.3). 13 3.3 Choice of K

The proposed d-fSPA algorithm requires the estimated number of basis functions ˆK as an input. 

MetaHunt treats K as a fixed, low-dimensional parameter that does not grow with the number of studies m. This reflects the premise that the basis functions represent an underlying latent structure shared across studies, and this structure should remain stable as additional studies become available. Choosing K is an important modeling decision. If K is too small, the resulting convex hull fails to capture key sources of cross-study heterogeneity, leading to information loss and underfitting. Conversely, selecting the value of K that is too large may lead to overfitting, introduce instability when fitting the weight model, and increase prediction variance. We discuss two data-driven approaches for selecting K.The first approach is to examine the following reconstruction error as a function of K,

E(K) := 1

m

> m

X

> i=1

min 

> πi

ˆf (i) −

> K

X

> k=1

πik ˆgk , (3) which measures the average distance between the observed functions and their projections onto the convex hull spanned by the K selected bases. For each candidate value of K, we compute the corresponding reconstruction error E(K). Plotting this error against K typically yields an “elbow” shape, where the reduction in error slows markedly beyond a certain point. This unsupervised approach is analogous to selection heuristics used in principal component analysis and archetypal analysis, and provides a convenient way to identify a reasonable range for K.The second approach is to evaluate the prediction error via cross-validation for different values of K. Since the ultimate goal is to predict the target function f (0) (x), it is natural to select 

ˆK based on out-of-sample predictive performance. In this approach, we perform cross-validation over the entire estimation and prediction pipeline. For each candidate K, we estimate the basis functions using a subset of studies, fit the weight model, generate predictions for the held-out studies, and compute the prediction error. The value of K that minimizes the average validation error is then selected. Although more computationally demanding, this supervised procedure is aligned with our inferential objective and appears to yield better predictive performance in practice. But, the two approaches complement each other. One can use the elbow plot to find an appropriate range for K, and use cross-validation to further refine the choice within that range. 14 3.4 Fitting the weight model 

Given the estimated basis functions {ˆgk} ˆKk=1 based on the d-fSPA algorithm, the next task is to estimate the study-specific mixing weights πi, which characterize how each study combines the shared latent basis functions. For each study i ∈ { 1, . . . , m }, we obtain ˆπi by projecting the observed function ˆf (i) onto the convex hull spanned by the estimated basis functions. Specifically, we solve the following constrained optimization problem, 

ˆπi = arg min  

> π∈∆ˆK−1

ˆf (i) −

> ˆK

X

> k=1

πik ˆgk . (4) The function norm can be chosen flexibly. In practice, we recommend the L2 norm with respect to the empirical covariate distribution of the target population. This optimization step yields the mixture weights that best reconstruct each study-level function using the recovered basis functions. With the estimated weights ˆπi in hand, we then fit the weight model introduced in Sec-tion 2.2. Any model that maps study-level covariates Wi to simplex-valued weights πi can be used, including parametric models (e.g. Dirichlet regression), semi-parametric models (e.g. RKHS Dirichlet regression model), or nonparametric approaches (e.g. random forests, neural networks). A natural alternative to MetaHunt is to pool all individual-level data across studies and fit a single regression model using both individual-level covariates X and study-level covariates 

W as joint inputs, where every individual within the same study shares the same value of W .The fitted model is then evaluated at W0 and the target-population covariate distribution to produce a prediction for the target site. We refer to this as the pooling approach. Compared to the pooling approach, MetaHunt is privacy-preserving and computationally efficient. First, the pooling approach requires access to individual-level data from every source study, whereas MetaHunt operates entirely on aggregate-level summaries {(Wi, ˆf (i))}mi=1 and is naturally privacy-preserving. Second, the pooled model must be refit whenever a new source study is added, while MetaHunt only updates the newly added study-level function estimate and re-runs the low-rank basis hunting step, with the costly fitting of study-specific functions performed locally at each site. Empirically, we find that MetaHunt achieves lower RMSE than the pooling approach, possibly reflecting the implicit denoising benefit of the low-rank representation; see Section 7 for detailed comparisons. 15 4 Conformal Prediction 

In Section 3, we explained how to obtain the recovered basis functions {ˆgk} ˆKk=1 using the d-fSPA algorithm, and fit the weight model cM that maps study-level covariates W to mixing weights 

π. With these two components, we can now predict the target function f (0) corresponding to a new study with covariates W0. Specifically, we first generate the predicted weight vector ˜π0

and then construct the target function: 

˜f (0) (·) = 

> ˆK

X

> k=1

˜π0k ˆgk(·) where ˜π0 = cM(W0). (5) The tilde notation highlights that these are predictions, in contrast to the hat notation used for estimation. With the predicted target function, we now develop prediction intervals to quantify un-certainty through conformal prediction. This task presents two main challenges. First, our outcome of interest is function-valued. Some existing work [e.g., Lei et al., 2015] develops con-formal confidence bands for random functions with distribution-free guarantee. However, these full confidence bands tend to be overly conservative and uninformative in practice. In our set-ting, we instead focus on pointwise inference for a fixed covariate value x, aiming to characterize uncertainty in the scalar quantity f (0) (x).Second, there is a measurement-error problem as the oracle study-level functions f (i)(x) are never observed directly. Instead, we only have access to their noisy estimates ˆf (i)(x). These estimates carry estimation error that may vary across studies and propagates through all stages of MetaHunt . To obtain theoretical guarantees for our prediction intervals, we therefore require conditions that control this estimation error. As shown in Algorithm 2, we adapt the split conformal prediction procedure of Shafer and Vovk [2008] to construct pointwise prediction intervals for f (0) (x) at a fixed covariate value x.We first split the studies into a training set and a calibration set. The training set is used to run the full estimation pipeline from Section 3, including basis hunting via the d-fSPA algorithm, weight estimation, and fitting the weight model. These together yield a predictor bf tr (x; W ).The calibration set is then used to compute conformity scores, defined as absolute residuals between the observed study-level functions ˆf (i)(x) and their corresponding predictions. The empirical (1 − α)-quantile of these conformity scores determines the width of the prediction interval centered at the predicted value for the target study. Split conformal prediction guarantees valid marginal coverage when the calibration data are exchangeable with the target data. In our setting, Assumption 1–3 ensure exchangeability of 

(Wi, f (i)(x)) across studies. Additionally, we require mild control over the estimation error in 16 Algorithm 2: Split conformal prediction for f (0) (x)

Input: Estimated functions { ˆf (i)(·)}mi=1 ; target-study covariates W0; evaluation point 

x; miscoverage level α ∈ (0 , 1) ; estimation pipeline. 

1. Data split: Randomly split the index set {1, . . . , m } into a training set Itr and a calibration set Ical , with sizes mtr and mcal , respectively. 

2. Train predictor on training studies: Using only {(Wi, ˆf (i)(·)) : i ∈ I tr }, run the estimation pipeline of Section 3 to obtain a prediction rule bf tr (x; W ) : X × W → R.

3. Compute calibration residuals: For each i ∈ I cal , calculate the conformity score. (i) Compute the predicted value at x: ˜f (i)(x) := bf tr (x; Wi).(ii) Define the conformity score (absolute residual): ri := ˆf (i)(x) − ˜f (i)(x) .

4. Estimate conformal quantile: Let r(1) ≤ · · · ≤ r(mcal ) be the order statistics of 

{ri : i ∈ I cal } and set q1−α(x) := r(⌈(1 −α)( mcal +1) ⌉).

5. Predict for the new study: Compute the point prediction for the new study, 

˜f (0) (x) := bf tr (x; W0).

Output: Split conformal prediction interval 

Cα(x) =  ˜f (0) (x) − q1−α(x), ˜f (0) (x) + q1−α(x).

the study-level functions ˆf (i)(x) as stated in Assumption 4. Finally, the following theorem establishes that our conformal interval achieves asymptotic marginal coverage for the target quantity f (0) (x).

Theorem 2 (Asymptotic marginal coverage guarantee) . Under Assumption 1– 4, we have 

lim Pr( f (0) (x) ∈ Cα(x)) ≥ 1 − α. 

This guarantee holds despite the existence of estimation error in the study-level functions and the fact that prediction proceeds through a multi-stage procedure involving basis hunting and weight modeling. The key reason is that conformal prediction relies mainly on the ex-changeability of calibration residuals. Because Assumption 4 ensures that estimation errors are uniformly small, even though the prediction rule is learned through a complex pipeline, the conformal adjustment corrects for its uncertainty in a distribution-free manner, ensuring valid coverage in large samples. It is worth contrasting our conformal procedure with the pooling approach discussed at the end of Section 3 from the perspective of exchangeability. The pooling approach treats 

X and W symmetrically as joint covariates in a single regression model. Depending on how conformal prediction is applied, this can implicitly require the exchangeability of individual-level triples (Xij , Wi, Y ij ) across both studies and individuals within studies, which is a stronger 17 condition than the study-level exchangeability of {(Wi, f (i))} used by MetaHunt . Empirically, the pooling approach tends to produce shorter prediction intervals, consistent with its access to higher-resolution data; see Section 7 for detailed comparisons. The split conformal procedure in Algorithm 2 produces intervals of a single width q1−α(x)

that does not depend on W0, which can be conservative when calibration residuals vary across studies. Several extensions of conformal prediction can potentially improve efficiency by allow-ing the width to adapt to W0. Weighted conformal prediction [Tibshirani et al., 2019] reweights calibration residuals by kernel similarity to W0. Conformalized quantile regression [Romano et al., 2019] conformalizes intervals from a conditional quantile regression on W . Both ap-proaches retain a marginal coverage guarantee, though weighted conformal additionally requires the weights to coincide with the true likelihood ratio. 

# 5 Extension to Functionals of the Target Function 

MetaHunt naturally extends from predicting the target function f (0) to predicting functionals of f (0) . Let Φ : F → R be a functional mapping elements of the function space F to real numbers. Our object of interest is then θ(0) = Φ  f (0) . This formulation accommodates many quantities of substantive interest, including averages, integrals, and other policy-relevant summaries of the predicted function. As a leading example, consider the average treatment effect (ATE) for the target population. If f (0) (x) represents a conditional average treatment effect (CATE), the target ATE is given by 

τ (0) = Φ  f (0)  = EP0,X 

îf (0) (X)ó ,

where P0,X denotes the covariate distribution of the target population. Given the predicted target function ˜f (0) , a natural point estimator of θ(0) is the plug-in estimator ˜θ(0) = Φ   ˜f (0) . In the ATE example, this corresponds to 

˜τ (0) = EP0,X 

î ˜f (0) (X)ó .

Uncertainty quantification for θ(0) can be obtained by modifying the conformity score in Algorithm 2. For each calibration study i, define 

ri = Φ  ˆf (i) − Φ  ˜f (i) .

That is, we measure the discrepancy between the observed functional summary and its predicted counterpart. Prediction intervals for θ(0) are then constructed using the empirical quantile of 18 {ri}, yielding a split-conformal interval centered at ˜θ(0) .

Corollary 1 (Asymptotic marginal coverage for functionals) . Suppose Assumptions 1– 4 hold. In addition, suppose Φ is Lipschitz continuous with respect to ∥ · ∥ L2(P0,X ), i.e., there exists a constant LΦ > 0 such that 

|Φ( f ) − Φ( g)| ≤ LΦ∥f − g∥L2(P0,X ), for all f, g ∈ F .

Then 

lim Pr Äθ(0) ∈ CΦ

> α

ä ≥ 1 − α, 

where CΦ 

> α

:= [ ˜θ(0) − qΦ1−α, ˜θ(0) + qΦ1−α] is the split conformal prediction interval with qΦ1−α denoting the ⌈(1 − α)( mcal + 1) ⌉-th smallest value among the conformity scores {ri : i ∈ I cal }.

The Lipschitz condition is satisfied by many functionals of practical interest. For example, when Φ( f ) = EP0,X [f (X)] corresponds to the ATE, the Cauchy–Schwarz inequality gives LΦ =1.

# 6 Simulation Studies 

We conduct simulation studies to evaluate the finite-sample performance of MetaHunt .

## 6.1 Setup 

We generate data from a two-layer hierarchical model using m = 100 source studies. In the first layer, we generate the study-level covariates Wi ∈ R3, the mixing weights πi, and the corresponding oracle functions f (i). For each study i, the study-level covariates and mixing weights are generated as 

Wi ∼ N (0, I3),

αi = 20 exp  (1 , Wi)⊤β,

πi ∼ Dirichlet( αi),

β =

à

1 −1 −1 12 1 −1 −10 4 0 01 0 −3 0

í

.

19 Each study-level oracle function is then constructed as a convex combination of four basis functions 

f (i)(x) =

> 4

X

> k=1

πik gk(x),g1(x) = −2x + 3 , g2(x) = x2/4, g3(x) = 10 sin( x/ 3) , g4(x) = −2|x + 4 |.

In the second layer, we generate individual-level data (Xij , Y ij ) for each study, using a com-mon sample size ni = 200 . Specifically, Xij ∼ N (0 , 52), and Yij | Xij ∼ N (f (i)(Xij ), 52). For each study i, we then estimate the study-level function ˆf (i) using a random forest regression fitted to its individual-level data. These estimated functions { ˆf (i)}mi=1 serve as the inputs to our low-rank basis hunting procedure based on the d-fSPA algorithm. For implementation, we approximate the functional norm in the d-fSPA algorithm using the empirical L2 norm with respect to the covariate distribution of the data-generating process, i.e., N (0 , 52). In practice, this is computed by evaluating each function on an independently sampled grid of covariate values and taking the empirical average of squared differences. For the denoising step in the d-fSPA algorithm, we set the tuning parameters to N = 0 .5 log m

and ∆ = max ij ∥ ˆf (i) − ˆf (j)∥/10 , which scale the neighborhood radius relative to the observed variability among the estimated functions. After the basis hunting step, we estimate the study-specific mixing weights via constrained projection and fit the weight model using a Dirichlet regression linking the estimated weights to the study-level covariates Wi. This pipeline yields the fitted components required for prediction and subsequent conformal inference. All reported mean squared error and coverage results are based on 200 independent Monte Carlo simulation runs. 

## 6.2 Findings 

As shown in Figure 1, we assess the choice of the number of basis functions K using two proposed criteria: reconstruction error and cross-validation prediction error. The left panel reports the reconstruction error E(K). For both fSPA and d-fSPA algorithms, the error decreases sharply for small K and then levels off, producing an elbow. The elbow appears near K = 4 for both methods. The middle panel shows cross-validation prediction errors, which decline substantially up to the true value K = 4 and then rise gradually for larger values. This pattern is consistent with the usual bias–variance tradeoff, as the model with small K underfits and fails to capture cross-study heterogeneity, while an overly large K introduces instability in the weight estimation step without improving predictive accuracy. Across both criteria, the d-fSPA algorithm generally achieves lower errors than the fSPA algorithm, reflecting the benefits of the denoising step in 20 010 20                     

> 123456789
> K
> Reconstruction error  Reconstruction error
> 20 30 40 50
> 23456789
> K
> CV error
> Cross−validation prediction error
> 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75
> 456789
> CV−selected K
> Frequency
> CV−selected K
> Method
> d−fSPA
> fSPA
> Method
> d−fSPA
> fSPA

Figure 1: (Left panel) Reconstruction error decreases with K and exhibits an elbow. (Middle panel) Cross-validation prediction error across values of K, minimized at K = 4 for d-fSPA. (Right panel) Empirical distribution of cross-validation–selected K over 200 Monte Carlo runs, with the true value (K = 4) selected most frequently. basis hunting. The right panel shows the distribution of CV-selected ˆK across 200 simulation runs, where K = 4 is selected most frequently. Taken together, these results support selecting 

ˆK = 4 and using the d-fSPA algorithm in subsequent analyses. Figure 2 reports the mean squared error (MSE) of the d-fSPA algorithm as a function of the number of studies m, for several choices of the basis dimension K. For implementation of the denoising step, we set the tuning parameter N = 0 .5 log m, and choose the neighborhood radius parameter ∆ = max ij ∥ ˆf (i) − ˆf (j)∥/{0.2 × (m − 100) + 10 }. This choice coincides with the neighborhood radius used above when m = 100 . For all choices of K, the MSE decreases rapidly as m increases from relatively small sample size, followed by a more gradual improvement thereafter. When K is too small ( K = 2 ), the MSE remains substantially higher, indicating underfitting due to an insufficiently expressive set of basis functions. The correctly specified value ( K = 4 ) consistently achieves the lowest MSE, demonstrating that the d-fSPA algorithm is able to recover and exploit the true low-rank structure. Further increasing K leads to higher prediction error, suggesting that overly large basis sets introduce redundancy and geometric mis-specification that degrade predictive performance. Overall, these results indicate that the d-fSPA algorithm achieves optimal predictive accuracy at the true value of K.We next evaluate the finite-sample performance of our conformal prediction procedure. We implement a 70-30 train-calibration split and estimate coverage over 200 simulation runs. In each run, we generate predictions for 100 target study-level covariates W0 and 1000 values of X. The overall empirical coverage across the 200 runs is 98.43%, exceeding the 95% target. This mild overcoverage is driven by estimation error in the study-level functions ˆf (i), which introduces additional uncertainty beyond what is accounted for in the conformal procedure. Figure 3 reports the average coverage and average 95% prediction interval length versus different values 21 K = 2 K = 3 K = 4 K = 6 K = 8      

> MSE
> 40 100 150 200 250 300
> 10 20 30 40 50
> m
> MSE

Mean Squared Error of d−fSPA Figure 2: Mean squared error (MSE) of d-fSPA as a function of the number of studies m over 200 simulation runs. MSE is shown for different number of the bases. For all choices of K, MSE decreases as m increases, with the correctly specified value (K = 4) achieving the lowest error. 0.75 0.80 0.85 0.90 0.95 1.00     

> −10 010
> x
> Coverage
> Average coverage
> 10 20 30 40
> −10 010
> x
> Interval length
> Average interval length

Figure 3: Average marginal coverage (left) and 95% prediction interval length (right) versus 

x over 200 simulation runs. The red dashed line in the left panel denotes the nominal 95% coverage. Coverage remains above the nominal level for most values of x, while it decreases and prediction intervals widen at extreme values of x, reflecting increased estimation uncertainty in the tails. of x. Theorem 2 guarantees asymptotic marginal coverage for any fixed x under exchangeability and mild estimation error control. In finite samples, coverage remains close to or above the nominal level for most values of x, while undercoverage may occur at extreme x values, where estimation error is larger, and data are relatively sparse. The right panel shows that confidence interval lengths are shortest in regions with high data density and expand toward the tails, reflecting increased uncertainty and demonstrating that the conformal intervals adapt to local variability. Figure 4 visualizes prediction intervals for six representative target study covariates W0.The shaded regions represent the prediction intervals. The predicted values (red dots) generally 22 020 40 60   

> −10 010

x  

> f(x)
> −30 −20 −10 010 20
> −10 010

x  

> f(x)
> −40 −20 020 40
> −10 010

x  

> f(x)
> −20 020 40
> −10 010

x  

> f(x)
> −50 −40 −30 −20 −10 010
> −10 010

x  

> f(x)
> −20 020
> −10 010

x

> f(x)

Figure 4: Prediction intervals, predicted values, and expected values versus x for six different new study-level covariates W0. The predicted functions closely track the expected values across the domain, while the prediction intervals adapt to local variability and widen in regions with greater uncertainty. track the true values (blue curves) closely, indicating that the combination of basis hunting and weight modeling captures the main functional patterns well. The prediction intervals adapt to local uncertainty and widen in regions with greater variability. Across all panels, most true values are covered by the intervals. These results suggest that the proposed conformal procedure provides reliable uncertainty quantification despite the multi-stage estimation pipeline and the estimation error in the observed study-level functions ˆf (i).

# 7 Empirical Application 

We illustrate MetaHunt using the Many Labs 1 project [Klein et al., 2014]. 

## 7.1 Setup 

The Many Labs 1 project is a large-scale multisite replication study in psychology. The project evaluates the replicability of 13 classic and contemporary experimental findings under a highly standardized protocol, with data collected across m = 36 independent sites. Among these, 27 studies were conducted in laboratory settings and 9 online; 25 sites are located in the United States and 11 in other countries. The combined dataset contains a total of 6,344 participants. 23 We preprocess the raw data following the scripts provided by the original authors. The analysis incorporates covariates at two levels. At the site level, we use a vector Wi ∈ R6

summarizing study context. This includes indicators for online versus laboratory administration and US versus international site, as well as site-level summary statistics such as average age, gender ratio, average political ideology, and a scalar measure of covariate shift relative to the target site constructed following Jin et al. [2025]. At the individual level, we use X ∈ R5

consisting of demographic and attitudinal variables: gender, age, race, political ideology, and American identity. We consider prediction and causal inference tasks. In both cases, the ultimate target is a scalar functional of the target-site function f (0) .1. Prediction task (average outcome). For each site i and hypothesis, we estimate a site-specific outcome regression function ˆf (i) using a random forest. The target estimand is the target-site mean outcome. 2. Causal inference task (ATE). For each site i and hypothesis with a binary treatment, we estimate a site-specific CATE function ˆf (i) using causal forests. The target estimand is the target-site average treatment effect (ATE). We implement a leave-one-site-out evaluation scheme. For each target site i, we fit the model using the remaining sites and then predict the corresponding target-site quantity. Because the project design provides the data from each target site, we can directly evaluate generalization performance in terms of prediction error and empirical coverage. As an empirical benchmark for each held-out target site, we use the raw target-site estimate (the sample mean for the prediction task and the raw difference-in-means ATE for the causal task), enabling transparent out-of-sample comparison. Due to the small number of sites, all conformal prediction intervals in the empirical ap-plication are constructed using cross-conformal prediction [Vovk et al., 2018]. In addition, for both MetaHunt and the pooling approach, we report a weighted conformal variant based on Tibshirani et al. [2019], in which each calibration site i is assigned a Gaussian kernel weight 

exp( −∥ Wi − W0∥2/(2 h2)) based on its similarity to the target site, and the conformal quantile is replaced by the corresponding weighted quantile. The bandwidth is set to h = 3 · hmed , where 

hmed is the median of pairwise distances in W . This variant upweights sites closer to the target and produces tighter intervals than the original procedure. In the empirical application, we benchmark MetaHunt against several existing general-ization strategies. For the prediction task, we compare Methods 1–3 below. For the causal inference task, we compare all six methods. 24 1. MetaHunt : We perform d-fSPA algorithm with the number of basis functions K se-lected by cross-validation, and fit the weight model via Dirichlet regression using site-level covariates. The resulting estimator combines study-specific functions through the learned low-rank representation and weight model. 2. Minimax-regret : The minimax-regret aggregation method of Zhang et al. [2024a], which constructs a weighted average of site-specific models by minimizing the worst-case regret over an uncertainty set. Prediction intervals are obtained via conformal inference. 3. Pooling : For this approach discussed at the end of Section 3, we use random forests for the prediction task and causal forests for the causal inference task. Prediction intervals are obtained via conformal inference. 4. Random-effects : This meta-analytic baseline computes the raw difference-in-means esti-mator at each site. These site-level estimates are then aggregated via linear random-effects meta-regression, incorporating site-level covariates W [Higgins et al., 2009]. We use the 

metafor package to fit the random-effects model [Viechtbauer, 2010]. Prediction intervals are constructed using the corresponding analytical variance estimates. 5. Doubly-robust : This two-step procedure is based on doubly robust generalization esti-mators [Dahabreh et al., 2019]. At each site, we first compute a doubly robust estimator that adjusts for covariate shift in X. In our implementation, both the outcome regres-sion and the site-membership propensity score are estimated using regression forests. The resulting estimates are then combined via random-effects meta-regression with site-level covariates W . Prediction intervals are obtained using analytical variance formulas. 6. Entropy-balancing : This two-step procedure applies entropy balancing [Hainmueller, 2012] at each site to adjust for covariate shift in X. The adjusted site-level estimates are then aggregated using random-effects meta-regression on W . Prediction intervals are constructed based on analytical variance estimates. These methods differ in how they use individual and site-level information. The pooling ap-proach is the only method that requires access to individual-level data and therefore does not operate under a privacy-preserving evidence synthesis framework. The minimax-regret method aggregates site-specific models without incorporating site-level information W . In contrast, the meta-analytic approaches (Random-effects, Doubly-robust, and Entropy-balancing) explicitly adjust for W through meta-regression. For the causal inference task, we further select a subset of site-level covariates W via cross-validation using MetaHunt , and the same subset is then applied to all methods. 25 scales sunk                                                        

> gambfal money quote reciprocity
> anchoring4 contact flag gainloss
> allowedforbidden anchoring1 anchoring2 anchoring3
> 0.0 0.1 0.2 7.2 7.6 8.0 8.4
> 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 4.5 4.0 4.5 5.0 5.5 6.0 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9
> 2250 2500 2750 3000 4.0 4.5 5.0 5.5 6.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 1.4 1.5 1.6
> 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 2250 2500 2750 3000 2000 2500 3000 3500 2100 2400 2700 3000 3300
> 2400 2600 2800 3000
> 1.475 1.500 1.525 1.550 1.575
> 0.60 0.65 0.70 0.75 0.80 0.85
> 2400 2500 2600 2700
> 2.8 3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6
> 5.4 5.5 5.6 5.7 5.8 5.9
> 2400 2500 2600 2700 2800
> 4.6 4.8 5.0
> 3.00 3.25 3.50 3.75
> 7.00 7.25 7.50 7.75 8.00
> 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30
> 2400 2600 2800 3000
> 2.9 3.0 3.1 3.2 3.3
> 0.15 0.20 0.25

Empirical benchmark 

> Predicted average

Figure 5: Scatterplots of predicted target-site mean outcomes versus the corresponding empir-ical benchmarks (raw target-site sample means), displayed separately for each hypothesis using 

MetaHunt . The dashed 45-degree line corresponds to perfect prediction, while the solid line shows the fitted linear regression. 

## 7.2 Findings 

7.2.1 Prediction task 

Figure 5 summarizes the performance of MetaHunt for the prediction task by plotting pre-dicted target-site mean outcomes against the corresponding empirical benchmarks, separately for each hypothesis. Performance varies across hypotheses. For some (e.g., various anchoring 

and flag hypotheses), predictions align closely with the 45-degree line, indicating strong accu-racy, while others exhibit greater dispersion, occasionally driven by outlying sites (e.g., gambfal 

and quote ). This heterogeneity is expected, as the explanatory power of site-level covariates W

differs across settings. Nevertheless, across many hypotheses, the relationship between predic-tions and benchmarks remains broadly positive, indicating that the method captures systematic cross-site variation in outcomes. 26 Method Std. RMSE Coverage Interval Length (relative) 

MetaHunt 0.904 0.988 0.969 (weighted PI) 0.976 0.764 Minimax-regret 1.125 0.982 0.964 Pooling 0.933 0.974 0.806 (weighted PI) 0.944 0.635 Table 1: Overall performance comparison for prediction task. Column “Std. RMSE” reports the root mean squared prediction error standardized by the empirical standard deviation of the target-site averages. Column “Coverage” gives the empirical coverage rate of the nominal 95% prediction intervals. “Interval Length (relative)” denotes the average prediction interval length normalized by the maximum interval width across methods. For MetaHunt and the pooling approach, “(weighted PI)” reports coverage and interval length under the weighted conformal procedure. Table 1 compares the overall performance of the three methods for the prediction task. Prediction accuracy is measured by the standardized RMSE, defined as the root mean squared prediction error normalized by the empirical standard deviation of the target-site averages, allowing aggregation across hypotheses with different scales. A value of one corresponds to using the average of empirical benchmarks across all sites (including the target site) as the predictor. 

MetaHunt achieves the lowest standardized RMSE (0.904), indicating the best predic-tive accuracy. This gain reflects the benefit of capturing between-site heterogeneity via a low-rank structure while incorporating site-level covariates W in the weighting model. Notably, 

MetaHunt outperforms the pooling approach (0.933), despite the latter’s access to individual-level data. In contrast, the minimax-regret approach yields a standardized RMSE above 1 (1.125), consistent with its focus on worst-case regret. Conformal prediction is applied to all methods and achieves coverage above the nominal 95% level. The final column reports the average interval length normalized by the maximum interval width across methods. With the unweighted conformal procedure, all three methods produce similarly conservative intervals; the weighted conformal variant tightens the interval length of 

MetaHunt from 0.969 to 0.764 (a 21% reduction) while maintaining coverage above the 95% target, and further reduces the interval length of the pooling approach from 0.806 to 0.635 .

7.2.2 Causal inference task 

Figure 6 summarizes the performance of MetaHunt for the causal inference task. It shows the target-site ATE estimates against the corresponding empirical benchmarks, separately for each hypothesis. As in the prediction task, performance varies across hypotheses, reflecting differ-27 scales sunk                                                         

> gambfal money quote reciprocity
> anchoring4 contact flag gainloss
> allowedforbidden anchoring1 anchoring2 anchoring3
> 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5
> 0123−0.2 0.0 0.2 0120.0 0.1 0.2 0.3
> 2400 2700 3000 −0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 −0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
> 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 1500 2000 2500 1500 2000 2500 3000 1000 2000 3000
> 1500 2000 2500 3000
> 0.28 0.29 0.30 0.31 0.32
> 0.10 0.12 0.14 0.16
> 2000 2100 2200 2300
> 0.00 0.02 0.04
> 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> 1600 1700 1800
> 0.1 0.2 0.3
> −0.05 0.00 0.05
> 0.60 0.65 0.70 0.75
> 0.17 0.19 0.21
> 2450 2500 2550 2600 2650
> 1.3 1.5 1.7
> 0.15 0.17 0.19

Empirical benchmark 

> Predicted ATE

Figure 6: Scatterplots of predicted target-site ATE versus the corresponding empirical bench-marks (raw target-site ATE), displayed separately for each hypothesis using MetaHunt . The dashed 45-degree line corresponds to perfect prediction, while the solid line shows the fitted linear regression. ences in how informative the site-level covariates W are for explaining cross-site heterogeneity. Overall, the alignment between predictions and benchmarks is weaker than in the prediction task, with smaller correlations and greater dispersion. This indicates the increased difficulty of ATE generalization relative to outcome prediction. Table 2 compares the overall performance of all methods. MetaHunt achieves the lowest standardized RMSE (0.981), indicating the best predictive accuracy. Notably, only MetaHunt 

and the pooling method attain standardized RMSE close to or below one. All meta-analytic approaches (Random-effects, Doubly-robust, and Entropy-balancing) yield values above one, al-though they also incorporate site-level covariates W . This suggests that simple meta-regression may be insufficient to capture complex cross-site heterogeneity. All methods based on conformal prediction achieve coverage above the nominal 95% level. In contrast, methods relying on analytical variance estimates (Random-effects, Doubly-robust, and 28 Method Std. RMSE Coverage Interval Length (relative) 

MetaHunt 0.981 0.976 0.801 (weighted PI) 0.956 0.660 Minimax-regret 1.076 0.972 0.781 Pooling 0.992 0.958 0.735 (weighted PI) 0.921 0.598 Random-effects 1.058 0.667 0.305 Doubly-robust 1.134 0.734 0.438 Entropy-balancing 1.657 0.837 0.934 Table 2: Overall performance comparison for target-site ATE prediction. Column “Std. RMSE” reports the root mean squared prediction error standardized by the empirical standard deviation of the target-site ATE estimates. Column “Coverage” gives the empirical coverage rate of the nominal 95% prediction intervals. “Interval Length (relative)” denotes the average prediction interval length normalized by the maximum interval width across methods. For MetaHunt and the pooling approach, “(weighted PI)” reports coverage and interval length under the weighted conformal procedure. Entropy-balancing) exhibit substantial undercoverage. This finding is consistent with that of Jin et al. [2024a] and suggests that these models are unable to fully account for the heterogeneity across studies. Among methods with valid coverage, MetaHunt with the weighted conformal variant attains the shortest interval length (0.660) while maintaining coverage above 95%. The weighted variant of pooling method produces even shorter intervals (0.598) but dips slightly below the nominal level (0.921). Lastly, Figure 7 compares the hypothesis-specific performance for the causal inference task. Performance varies across hypotheses. MetaHunt and the pooling method typically achieve standardized MSE around or below one, while other approaches rarely do so, indicating weaker ability to capture cross-site heterogeneity. Entropy-balancing is notably unstable, with large variability in MSE and generally wider intervals, likely due to difficulties in constructing stable weights under substantial covariate differences across sites. Methods based on conformal predic-tion maintain near-nominal coverage across hypotheses, whereas those using analytical variance estimates exhibit systematic undercoverage. 

# 8 Concluding Remarks 

We have proposed MetaHunt , a framework for privacy-preserving meta-analysis of function-valued quantities across heterogeneous studies. MetaHunt combines a low-rank basis repre-sentation, recovered by the proposed d-fSPA algorithm, with a flexible weight model linking mixing weights to study-level covariates. We established formal consistency of the recovered ba-29 MetaHunt Minimax−regret Pooling Random−effects Doubly−robust Entropy−balancing                                                            

> Std. RMSE Coverage PI length (relative)
> 12345678910 11 12 13 14 12345678910 11 12 13 14 12345678910 11 12 13 14 12345678910 11 12 13 14 12345678910 11 12 13 14 12345678910 11 12 13 14
> 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5
> 0.6 0.8 1.0
> 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
> Hypothesis ID

Figure 7: Hypothesis-specific performance for the causal inference task under leave-one-site-out evaluation. The top, middle, and bottom rows report standardized root mean squared error (RMSE), empirical coverage of nominal 95% prediction intervals, and relative prediction interval length, respectively, for each method across hypotheses. Each black point corresponds to one hypothesis. In the coverage and interval-length rows, blue crosses overlay the values obtained under the weighted conformal procedure for the two methods ( MetaHunt and pooling) where this variant is available. The dashed horizontal line at 1 in the top row denotes the empirical variance of the target-site benchmark. Interval lengths are normalized by the maximum interval width across methods within each hypothesis to facilitate comparison of efficiency. sis functions, extending vertex-hunting analysis to the infinite-dimensional functional setting for the first time. For uncertainty quantification, we developed conformal prediction intervals with asymptotic marginal coverage for both pointwise prediction and scalar functionals such as the average treatment effect. Because MetaHunt operates entirely on aggregate-level summaries, it is naturally privacy-preserving and accommodates modern machine learning estimators for the study-level functions. In our empirical application on the Many Labs 1 data, MetaHunt 

achieves lower prediction RMSE than all competing approaches, including the pooled approach that has access to individual-level data, while maintaining valid conformal coverage above the nominal level. We note several limitations of MetaHunt . First, the d-fSPA algorithm recovers basis functions by selecting from the observed studies, and its accuracy depends on the availability of near-pure studies whose mixing weights are concentrated near a single vertex of the simplex. When the number of studies m is small, such near-pure studies may not be present, degrading basis recovery. A small m also makes reliable selection of K more difficult, as the reconstruction 30 error and cross-validation criteria become less stable. Second, the predictive performance relies on the study-level covariates W being sufficiently informative about the mixing weights π.When W has limited explanatory power, the weight model may fail to capture meaningful patterns of cross-study heterogeneity. This was reflected in the empirical application, where the causal inference task exhibited weaker performance than the outcome prediction task, partly due to the difficulty of explaining cross-site variation in treatment effects using the available site-level covariates. Third, although we provide theoretically justified choices of the denoising tuning parameters (N, ∆) , the resulting basis recovery can still be sensitive to these choices in finite samples, especially when the number of studies m is small. We highlight several directions for future research. First, in some applications such as multi-center clinical trials, outcome data may be available from the target site in addition to the study-level covariates W0. Incorporating such target-site observations could yield efficiency gains, especially when the CATE function is estimated with substantial noise. For example, we can directly constrain the mixing weights or by refining the predicted function through a semi-supervised update. How to optimally combine target-site data with the proposed aggregate-level framework is an open problem. Second, the exchangeability assumption underlying our conformal prediction procedure may not hold when studies are collected sequentially, exhibit systematic temporal trends, or are selected in a non-representative manner. Extending the framework to non-exchangeable settings, for example through online conformal methods or time-varying weight models, would broaden its applicability. 31 References 

J. Aitchison. The statistical analysis of compositional data (with discussion). Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B, Methodological, 44(2):139–177, 1982. Ahmed M Alaa, Zaid Ahmad, and Mark van der Laan. Conformal meta-learners for predictive inference of individual treatment effects. Advances in neural information processing systems, 36:47682–47703, 2023. Isaiah Andrews, Drew Fudenberg, Lihua Lei, Annie Liang, and Chaofeng Wu. The transfer performance of economic models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.04796, 2022. Rodolfo Stoffel Antunes, Cristiano André da Costa, Arne Küderle, Imrana Abdullahi Yari, and Björn Eskofier. Federated learning for healthcare: Systematic review and architecture proposal. ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology (TIST), 13(4):1–23, 2022. Mário César Ugulino Araújo, Teresa Cristina Bezerra Saldanha, Roberto Kawakami Harrop Gal-vao, Takashi Yoneyama, Henrique Caldas Chame, and Valeria Visani. The successive projec-tions algorithm for variable selection in spectroscopic multicomponent analysis. Chemometrics and intelligent laboratory systems, 57(2):65–73, 2001. William L Baker, Michael C White, Joseph C Cappelleri, Jeffrey Kluger, Craig I Coleman, and Health Outcomes, Policy, and Economics (HOPE) Collaborative Group. Understanding heterogeneity in meta-analysis: the role of meta-regression. International Journal of Clinical Practice, 63(10):1426–1434, 2009. Aharon Ben-Tal, Dick Den Hertog, Anja De Waegenaere, Bertrand Melenberg, and Gijs Rennen. Robust solutions of optimization problems affected by uncertain probabilities. Management Science, 59(2):341–357, 2013. José M Bioucas-Dias, Antonio Plaza, Nicolas Dobigeon, Mario Parente, Qian Du, Paul Gader, and Jocelyn Chanussot. Hyperspectral unmixing overview: Geometrical, statisti-cal, and sparse regression-based approaches. IEEE journal of selected topics in applied earth observations and remote sensing, 5(2):354–379, 2012. Michael Borenstein, Larry V. Hedges, Julian P. T. Higgins, and Hannah R. Rothstein. Introduction to Meta-Analysis. John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, NJ, 2nd edition, 2021. ISBN 9781119558392. URL https://books.google.com/books?id=pdQnEAAAQBAJ .32 Danielle L Burke, Joie Ensor, and Richard D Riley. Meta-analysis using individual participant data: one-stage and two-stage approaches, and why they may differ. Statistics in medicine, 36(5):855–875, 2017. Siqi Cao and Shu Yang. Heterogeneity-aware federated causal inference leveraging effect-measure transportability. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.16317, 2025. Noel A Card. Applied meta-analysis for social science research. Guilford Publications, 2015. Justin M Clark, Kollin W Rott, James S Hodges, and Jared D Huling. Causally-interpretable random-effects meta-analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.03544, 2023. Harris Cooper, Larry V Hedges, and Jeffrey C Valentine. The handbook of research synthesis and meta-analysis. Russell Sage Foundation, 2019. Adele Cutler and Leo Breiman. Archetypal analysis. Technometrics, 36(4):338–347, 1994. Issa J Dahabreh, Sarah E Robertson, Eric J Tchetgen, Elizabeth A Stuart, and Miguel A Hernán. Generalizing causal inferences from individuals in randomized trials to all trial-eligible individuals. Biometrics, 75(2):685–694, 2019. Issa J Dahabreh, Lucia C Petito, Sarah E Robertson, Miguel A Hernán, and Jon A Stein-grimsson. Toward causally interpretable meta-analysis: transporting inferences from multiple randomized trials to a new target population. Epidemiology, 31(3):334–344, 2020. Issa J Dahabreh, Sarah E Robertson, Lucia C Petito, Miguel A Hernán, and Jon A Steingrims-son. Efficient and robust methods for causally interpretable meta-analysis: Transporting in-ferences from multiple randomized trials to a target population. Biometrics, 79(2):1057–1072, 2023. Thomas PA Debray, Karel GM Moons, Gert van Valkenhoef, Orestis Efthimiou, Noemi Hummel, Rolf HH Groenwold, Johannes B Reitsma, and GetReal Methods Review Group. Get real in individual participant data (ipd) meta-analysis: a review of the methodology. Research synthesis methods, 6(4):293–309, 2015. John C Duchi, Peter W Glynn, and Hongseok Namkoong. Statistics of robust optimization: A generalized empirical likelihood approach. Mathematics of Operations Research, 46(3): 946–969, 2021. Robin Dunn, Larry Wasserman, and Aaditya Ramdas. Distribution-free prediction sets for two-layer hierarchical models. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 118(544): 2491–2502, 2023. 33 Nicolas Gillis and Stephen A Vavasis. Fast and robust recursive algorithmsfor separable nonneg-ative matrix factorization. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 36(4):698–714, 2013. Nicolas Gillis and Stephen A Vavasis. Semidefinite programming based preconditioning for more robust near-separable nonnegative matrix factorization. SIAM Journal on Optimization, 25 (1):677–698, 2015. Anna-Bettina Haidich. Meta-analysis in medical research. Hippokratia, 14(Suppl 1):29, 2010. Jens Hainmueller. Entropy balancing for causal effects: A multivariate reweighting method to produce balanced samples in observational studies. Political analysis, 20(1):25–46, 2012. Larry Han, Zhu Shen, and Jose Zubizarreta. Multiply robust federated estimation of targeted average treatment effects. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:70453– 70482, 2023. Larry Han, Jue Hou, Kelly Cho, Rui Duan, and Tianxi Cai. Federated adaptive causal estimation (face) of target treatment effects. Journal of the American Statistical Association, pages 1–14, 2025. Larry V. Hedges and Ingram Olkin. Statistical Methods for Meta-analysis. Academic Press, 1985. Julian PT Higgins, Simon G Thompson, and David J Spiegelhalter. A re-evaluation of random-effects meta-analysis. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series A: Statistics in Society, 172(1):137–159, 2009. Tailen Hsing and Randall Eubank. Theoretical Foundations of Functional Data Analysis, with an Introduction to Linear Operators. John Wiley & Sons, 2015. Sihan Huang, Jiajin Sun, and Yang Feng. Pairwise covariates-adjusted block model for commu-nity detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.03469, 2018. Yujin Jeong and Dominik Rothenhäusler. Out-of-distribution generalization under random, dense distributional shifts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.18370, 2024. Jiashun Jin, Zheng Tracy Ke, and Shengming Luo. Mixed membership estimation for social networks. Journal of Econometrics, 239(2):105369, 2024a. Jiashun Jin, Zheng Tracy Ke, Gabriel Moryoussef, Jiajun Tang, and Jingming Wang. Improved algorithm and bounds for successive projection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.11013, 2024b. 34 Ying Jin, Zhimei Ren, and Emmanuel J Candès. Sensitivity analysis of individual treatment effects: A robust conformal inference approach. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 120(6):e2214889120, 2023. Ying Jin, Naoki Egami, and Dominik Rothenhäusler. Beyond reweighting: On the predictive role of covariate shift in effect generalization. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 122(45):e2427181122, 2025. Peter Kairouz, H Brendan McMahan, Brendan Avent, Aurélien Bellet, Mehdi Bennis, Ar-jun Nitin Bhagoji, Kallista Bonawitz, Zachary Charles, Graham Cormode, Rachel Cummings, et al. Advances and open problems in federated learning. Foundations and trends ® in machine learning, 14(1–2):1–210, 2021. Zheng Tracy Ke and Minzhe Wang. Using svd for topic modeling. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 119(545):434–449, 2024. Edward H Kennedy. Towards optimal doubly robust estimation of heterogeneous causal effects. Electronic Journal of Statistics, 17(2):3008–3049, 2023. Edward H Kennedy, Sivaraman Balakrishnan, James M Robins, and Larry Wasserman. Minimax rates for heterogeneous causal effect estimation. Annals of statistics, 52(2):793, 2024. Richard A Klein, Kate A Ratliff, Michelangelo Vianello, Reginald B Adams Jr, Štěpán Bahník, Michael J Bernstein, Konrad Bocian, Mark J Brandt, Beach Brooks, Claudia Chloe Brum-baugh, et al. Investigating variation in replicability. Social psychology, 2014. Sören R Künzel, Jasjeet S Sekhon, Peter J Bickel, and Bin Yu. Metalearners for estimating heterogeneous treatment effects using machine learning. Proceedings of the national academy of sciences, 116(10):4156–4165, 2019. Jing Lei, Alessandro Rinaldo, and Larry Wasserman. A conformal prediction approach to explore functional data. Annals of Mathematics and Artificial Intelligence, 74(1):29–43, 2015. Lihua Lei and Emmanuel J Candès. Conformal inference of counterfactuals and individual treatment effects. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B: Statistical Methodology, 83(5):911–938, 2021. Tian Li, Anit Kumar Sahu, Ameet Talwalkar, and Virginia Smith. Federated learning: Chal-lenges, methods, and future directions. IEEE signal processing magazine, 37(3):50–60, 2020. Yi Liu, Alexander W Levis, Sharon-Lise Normand, and Larry Han. Multi-source conformal inference under distribution shift. Proceedings of machine learning research, 235:31344, 2024. 35 Guodong Long, Yue Tan, Jing Jiang, and Chengqi Zhang. Federated learning for open banking. In Federated learning: privacy and incentive, pages 240–254. Springer, 2020. David Lunn, Jessica Barrett, Michael Sweeting, and Simon Thompson. Fully bayesian hierarchi-cal modelling in two stages, with application to meta-analysis. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series C: Applied Statistics, 62(4):551–572, 2013. Brendan McMahan, Eider Moore, Daniel Ramage, Seth Hampson, and Blaise Aguera y Ar-cas. Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized data. In Artificial intelligence and statistics, pages 1273–1282. PMLR, 2017. Tomohiko Mizutani and Mirai Tanaka. Efficient preconditioning for noisy separable nonnega-tive matrix factorization problems by successive projection based low-rank approximations. Machine Learning, 107(4):643–673, 2018. Weibin Mo, Weijing Tang, Songkai Xue, Yufeng Liu, and Ji Zhu. Minimax regret learning for data with heterogeneous subgroups. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.01709, 2024. Sharon-Lise T Normand. Meta-analysis: formulating, evaluating, combining, and reporting. Statistics in medicine, 18(3):321–359, 1999. James O Ramsay and Bernard W Silverman. Functional Data Analysis. Springer, 2nd edition, 2005. Nicola Rieke, Jonny Hancox, Wenqi Li, Fausto Milletari, Holger R Roth, Shadi Albarqouni, Spyridon Bakas, Mathieu N Galtier, Bennett A Landman, Klaus Maier-Hein, et al. The future of digital health with federated learning. NPJ digital medicine, 3(1):119, 2020. Yaniv Romano, Evan Patterson, and Emmanuel Candes. Conformalized quantile regression. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019. Kollin W Rott, Justin M Clark, M Hassan Murad, James S Hodges, and Jared Huling. Causally interpretable meta-analysis combining aggregate and individual participant data. American Journal of Epidemiology, page kwae371, 2024. Patrick Rubin-Delanchy, Joshua Cape, Minh Tang, and Carey E Priebe. A statistical inter-pretation of spectral embedding: the generalised random dot product graph. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B: Statistical Methodology, 84(4):1446–1473, 2022. Rahul Satija, Jeffrey A Farrell, David Gennert, Alexander F Schier, and Aviv Regev. Spatial reconstruction of single-cell gene expression data. Nature biotechnology, 33(5):495–502, 2015. 36 Michael Seo, Ian R White, Toshi A Furukawa, Hissei Imai, Marco Valgimigli, Matthias Egger, Marcel Zwahlen, and Orestis Efthimiou. Comparing methods for estimating patient-specific treatment effects in individual patient data meta-analysis. Statistics in medicine, 40(6):1553– 1573, 2021. Glenn Shafer and Vladimir Vovk. A tutorial on conformal prediction. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 9(3), 2008. Wenqi Shi and José R Zubizarreta. On the use of weighting for personalized and transparent evidence synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.00228, 2025. Santiago Silva, Boris A Gutman, Eduardo Romero, Paul M Thompson, Andre Altmann, and Marco Lorenzi. Federated learning in distributed medical databases: Meta-analysis of large-scale subcortical brain data. In 2019 IEEE 16th international symposium on biomedical imaging (ISBI 2019), pages 270–274. IEEE, 2019. Jon A Steingrimsson, David H Barker, Ruofan Bie, and Issa J Dahabreh. Systematically missing data in causally interpretable meta-analysis. Biostatistics, 25(2):289–305, 2024. Dimitris Stogiannis, Fotios Siannis, and Emmanouil Androulakis. Heterogeneity in meta-analysis: a comprehensive overview. The International Journal of Biostatistics, 20(1):169–199, 2024. Ryan J Tibshirani, Rina Foygel Barber, Emmanuel J Candès, and Aaditya Ramdas. Conformal prediction under covariate shift. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019. Elizabeth Tipton, James E Pustejovsky, and Hedyeh Ahmadi. A history of meta-regression: Technical, conceptual, and practical developments between 1974 and 2018. Research synthesis methods, 10(2):161–179, 2019. Wolfgang Viechtbauer. Conducting meta-analyses in r with the metafor package. Journal of statistical software, 36:1–48, 2010. Tat-Thang Vo, Tran Trong Khoi Le, Sivem Afach, and Stijn Vansteelandt. Integration of aggregated data in causally interpretable meta-analysis by inverse weighting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.05634, 2025. Vladimir Vovk, Alexander Gammerman, and Glenn Shafer. Algorithmic learning in a random world. Springer, 2005. 37 Vladimir Vovk, Ilia Nouretdinov, Valery Manokhin, and Alexander Gammerman. Cross-conformal predictive distributions. In conformal and probabilistic prediction and applications, pages 37–51. PMLR, 2018. Stefan Wager and Susan Athey. Estimation and inference of heterogeneous treatment effects using random forests. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 113(523):1228–1242, 2018. Zhenyu Wang, Peter Bühlmann, and Zijian Guo. Distributionally robust learning for multi-source unsupervised domain adaptation. The Annals of Statistics, 2025. Ruoxuan Xiong, Allison Koenecke, Michael Powell, Zhu Shen, Joshua T Vogelstein, and Susan Athey. Federated causal inference in heterogeneous observational data. Statistics in Medicine, 42(24):4418–4439, 2023a. Xin Xiong, Zijian Guo, and Tianxi Cai. Distributionally robust transfer learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.06534, 2023b. Jie Xu, Benjamin S Glicksberg, Chang Su, Peter Walker, Jiang Bian, and Fei Wang. Federated learning for healthcare informatics. Journal of healthcare informatics research, 5(1):1–19, 2021. Yi Zhang, Melody Huang, and Kosuke Imai. Minimax regret estimation for generalizing hetero-geneous treatment effects with multisite data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.11136, 2024a. Zihan Zhang, Wenhao Zhan, Yuxin Chen, Simon S Du, and Jason D Lee. Optimal multi-distribution learning. In The Thirty Seventh Annual Conference on Learning Theory, pages 5220–5223. PMLR, 2024b. 38 A Proofs 

## A.1 Proof of Theorem 1 

A.1.1 Notation and proof strategy 

Let (H, ⟨· , ·⟩ ) be the Hilbert space L2(μ) equipped with the inner product induced by the func-tional norm, and write ∥h∥H := ⟨h, h ⟩1/2. Throughout this section, ∥ · ∥ H denotes the same 

L2(μ) norm as ∥ · ∥ used in the main text. We note that H here refers to L2(μ) and should not be confused with the RKHS Hκ appearing in Examples 1 and 2. Let G : RK → H be the linear operator defined by Ge k = gk, where {ek}Kk=1 denotes the canonical basis of RK . Define the Gram matrix Γ ∈ RK×K by Γij := ⟨gi, g j ⟩.We center the basis functions by 

¯g := 1

K

> K

X

> k=1

gk, ˜gk := gk − ¯g, k = 1 , . . . , K. 

Then for any π, ˜π ∈ ∆K−1,

> K

X

> k=1

(πk − ˜πk)gk =

> K

X

> k=1

(πk − ˜πk)˜ gk,

since PKk=1 (πk − ˜πk) = 0 . Hence, only the centered family {˜gk}Kk=1 matters on the simplex-difference subspace. Let ˜G : RK → H be the linear operator defined by ˜Ge k = ˜ gk, and define the corresponding Gram matrix ˜Γ ∈ RK×K by ˜Γij := ⟨˜gi, ˜gj ⟩. Denote σ∗ := 

»

λK−1(˜Γ) , where 

λk(Γ) denotes the k-th largest eigenvalue of a symmetric matrix Γ.Denote the convex hull generated by the basis functions by 

S := 

n KX

> k=1

πkgk : π ∈ ∆K−1

o

,

and define the following geometric quantities: 

β( ˆf , G ) := max 

(

max  

> 1≤i≤m

Dist H( ˆf (i), S), max  

> 1≤k≤K

min  

> 1≤i≤m

∥ ˆf (i) − gk∥H

)

, (A1) 

γ(G) := min  

> g0∈S

max  

> 1≤k≤K

∥gk − g0∥H, dmax (G) := max  

> 1≤k≤K

∥gk∥H, (A2) where Dist H(f, S) := inf s∈S ∥f − s∥H. The quantity β( ˆf , G ) measures how well the observed functions approximate the simplex geometry: the first term captures the maximum distance of 39 any observed function from S, and the second captures the worst-case distance from any vertex to the nearest observed function. The quantity γ(G) is the minimax radius of the simplex, and 

dmax (G) is the maximum norm of the basis functions. We first note that the non-degeneracy condition in Assumption 1 is equivalent to σ∗ > 0.Indeed, since the differences gk − g1 = ˜ gk − ˜g1 lie in the span of {˜g1, . . . , ˜gK }, and conversely 

˜g1 = −K−1 PKk=2 (gk − g1) shows each centered function lies in the span of the differences, we have span {g2 − g1, . . . , g K − g1} = span {˜g1, . . . , ˜gK }. Therefore, the differences are linearly independent in L2(μ) if and only if rank( ˜Γ) = K −1, which is equivalent to σ∗ =

»

λK−1(˜Γ) > 0.The proof proceeds in three parts. We first establish a non-asymptotic error bound for the fSPA algorithm (without denoising) in the Hilbert space H (Theorem A1). Extending the analysis of Jin et al. [2024b] from Rd to H, this result shows that the basis recovery error is bounded by a constant multiple of β( ˆf , G ), provided β( ˆf , G ) is sufficiently small relative to σ∗.We then show that under Assumptions 4 and 5, the quantity β( ˆf , G ) vanishes in probability (Lemma A6), bridging the finite-sample bound to the consistency result. Finally, in the proof of Theorem 1, we incorporate the denoising step by showing that the denoised functions satisfy 

β( ˜f , G ) = oP (1) with appropriate denoising parameters (N, ∆) , from which consistency follows by the same argument. 

Theorem A1 (fSPA error bounds) . Suppose σ∗ > 0 and β( ˆf , G ) satisfies 

450 dmax (G) max 

n

1, dmax (G)

σ∗

o

β( ˆf , G ) ≤ σ2 

> ∗

. (A3) 

Apply the fSPA (Algorithm 1 without the denoising step) to ˆf (1) , . . . , ˆf (m) ∈ H and let ˆg1, . . . , ˆgK

denote the K selected functions. Then, up to a permutation of these K functions, 

max  

> 1≤k≤K

∥ˆgk − gk∥H ≤ 1 + 30 γ(G)

σ∗

max 

n

1, dmax (G)

σ∗

o!

β( ˆf , G ). (A4) 

A.1.2 Preliminary lemmas 

To prove Theorem A1, we first develop a series of preliminary lemmas. 

Lemma A1. For any π, ˜π ∈ ∆K−1,

»

λK−1(˜Γ) ∥π − ˜π∥2 ≤ ∥ Gπ − G˜π∥H ≤ γ(G) ∥π − ˜π∥1. (A5) 

Moreover, fix an integer 1 ≤ s ≤ K − 2. If π and ˜π share at least s common entries, then 

∥Gπ − G˜π∥H ≥

»

λK−1−s(˜Γ) ∥π − ˜π∥2. (A6) 40 Lemma A2. Fix an integer K ≥ 2 and functions g1, . . . , g K ∈ H . Define 

a := min  

> i̸=j

∥gi − gj ∥H, b := max  

> i̸=j

∥gi∥H − ∥ gj ∥H .

For any π = ( π1, . . . , π K ) ∈ ∆K−1, let L := PKk=1 πk∥gk∥H. Then 

> K

X

> k=1

πkgk

> H

≤ L − a2 − b2

4L

> K

X

> k=1

πk(1 − πk). (A7) 

Lemma A3. Fix 1 ≤ s ≤ K − 2. Let P : H → H be any orthogonal projection operator whose range is s-dimensional. Define the K × K matrix 

ΓP := G∗(I − P ) G, i.e., (Γ P )ij = ⟨(I − P )gi, (I − P )gj ⟩.

Then 

λK−1−s(Γ P ) ≥ λK−1(Γ) . (A8) 

Lemma A4. Fix 0 ≤ s ≤ K − 2. Suppose there exist indices {k1, . . . , k s} ⊂ { 1, . . . , K } such that ∥gkj ∥H ≤ δ for j = 1 , . . . , s . If λK−1−s(Γ) ≥ 2( K − 2) δ2, then 

max  

> 1≤k≤K

∥gk∥H ≥√K − s − 1

p2( K − s)

»

λK−1−s(Γ) ≥ 12

»

λK−1−s(Γ) . (A9) Given ε ∈ (0 , 1) and 1 ≤ k ≤ K. Define the ε-simplicial neighborhood of gk inside S as 

Vk(ε) := 

n

f ∈ S : f =

> K

X

> ℓ=1

πℓgℓ, π ∈ ∆K−1, π k ≥ 1 − ε

o

.

Define 

K∗ := 

n

k ∈ { 1, . . . , K } : ∥gk∥H = dmax (G)

o

.

Fix h0 > 0 and ε0 ∈ (0 , 1/2) . Define 

K(h0) := 

n

k ∈ { 1, . . . , K } : ∥gk∥H ≥ dmax (G) − h0

o

,

and 

V(ε0, h 0) := [

> k∈K (h0)

Vk(ε0) ⊂ S . (A10) 41 Lemma A5. Suppose there exists σ∗ > 0 such that 

dmax (G) ≥ σ∗/2, min   

> 1≤k̸=ℓ≤K

∥gk − gℓ∥H ≥ √2 σ∗. (A11) 

For any t > 0 such that max {1, d max (G)/σ ∗} t < 3σ∗, set 

h0 = σ∗/3, 12 > ε 0 ≥ 6σ−1 

> ∗

max {1, d max (G)/σ ∗} t. (A12) 

Then 

∥f ∥H ≤ dmax (G) − t, for all f ∈ S \ V (ε0, h 0). (A13) The following lemma controls β( ˆf , G ) and is used to bridge Theorem A1 to the consistency result (Theorem 1). 

Lemma A6. Under Assumptions 1, 4, and 5, we have 

β( ˆf , G ) ≤ max  

> 1≤i≤m

∥ϵ(i)∥H + 2 δm dmax (G) = oP (1) .

A.1.3 Proof of main results 

Proof of Theorem A1. We follow the proof of Theorem B.1 in Jin et al. [2024b]. The proof consists of two steps. In Step 1, we study the first iteration of SPA and show that ˆg1 falls in the neighborhood of a true basis function. In Step 2, we recursively study the remaining iterations. 

Step 1: Analysis of the first iteration of SPA. 

We begin by analyzing the first iteration of SPA. For notational convenience, write 

γ := γ(G), dmax := dmax (G), β := β( ˆf , G ).

Recall that, by definition of β( ˆf , G ),

max  

> 1≤i≤m

Dist H( ˆf (i), S) ≤ β, max  

> 1≤k≤K

min  

> 1≤i≤m

∥ ˆf (i) − gk∥H ≤ β. (A14) Applying Lemma A4 with s = 0 , we obtain dmax ≥ σ∗/2. Moreover, for any k̸ = ℓ, Lemma A1 with π = ek and ˜π = eℓ gives ∥gk −gℓ∥H ≥

»

λK−1(˜Γ) ∥ek −eℓ∥2 = √2 σ∗, verifying the separation condition (A11). We then apply Lemma A5. Let V(ε0, h 0) be defined as in (A10), with 

h0 := σ∗/3, ε0 := 15 max {σ−1 

> ∗

, σ −2 

> ∗

dmax }β. (A15) The assumption of the theorem yields ε0 < 1/2. Moreover, setting t = 7 β/ 3 gives ε0 ≥

42 6σ−1 

> ∗

max {1, d max /σ ∗}t, so the condition in Lemma A5 is satisfied. Applying Lemma A5 yields 

max  

> ˆf∈S\V (ε0,h 0)

∥ ˆf ∥H ≤ dmax − 7β/ 3. (A16) Let K∗ := K(0) . For any k ∈ K ∗, it follows by (A14) that there exists at least one index i∗ such that ∥ ˆf (i∗) − gk∥H ≤ β. Since ∥gk∥H = dmax for k ∈ K ∗, the triangle inequality implies 

∥ ˆf (i∗)∥H ≥ ∥ gk∥H − β = dmax − β. 

Let i1 := arg max i ∥ ˆf (i)∥H be the index selected by SPA in the first iteration. Then 

∥ ˆf (i1)∥H ≥ ∥ ˆf (i∗)∥H ≥ dmax − β. (A17) Combining (A16) and (A17), we conclude that ˆf (i1) /∈ S \ V (ε0, h 0). Equivalently, 

ˆf (i1) ∈ V (ε0, h 0) or ˆf (i1) /∈ S . (A18) Suppose first that ˆf (i1) ∈ V (ε0, h 0). Since the sets {V k(ε0)}k∈K (h0) are disjoint, there exists a unique k1 ∈ K (h0) such that ˆf (i1) ∈ V k1 (ε0). By Lemma A1, 

∥ ˆf (i1) − gk1 ∥H ≤ 2γ ε 0. (A19) Now suppose ˆf (i1) /∈ S . Let proj S ( ˆf (i1)) denote the closest point to ˆf (i1) in S. By (A14), 

∥ ˆf (i1) − proj S ( ˆf (i1))∥H ≤ β. 

Combining this with (A17) yields 

∥proj S ( ˆf (i1))∥H ≥ ∥ ˆf (i1)∥H − β ≥ dmax − 2β. 

Together with (A16), this implies that proj S ( ˆf (i1)) ∈ V (ε0, h 0). Therefore, there exists a unique 

k1 ∈ K (h0) such that proj S ( ˆf (i1)) ∈ V k1 (ε0). By Lemma A1 again, 

∥proj S ( ˆf (i1)) − gk1 ∥H ≤ 2γ ε 0. (A20) Combining this with the triangle inequality gives 

∥ ˆf (i1) − gk1 ∥H ≤ ∥ ˆf (i1) − proj S ( ˆf (i1))∥H + ∥proj S ( ˆf (i1)) − gk1 ∥H ≤ β + 2 γ ε 0.

43 Putting the two cases together and substituting the value of ε0 from (A15), we conclude that 

∥ ˆf (i1) − gk1 ∥H ≤ β + 2 γ ε 0 ≤



1 + 30 γσ∗

max {1, d max /σ ∗}



β, (A21) for some k1 ∈ { 1, . . . , K }. This shows that the function selected in the first iteration of SPA lies in the neighborhood of a true basis function. 

Step 2: Analysis of the general iteration. 

We proceed by induction. Suppose that after (s − 1) iterations (s ∈ { 2, . . . , K }), SPA has selected indices i1, . . . , i s−1 such that 

∥ ˆf (ir ) − gkr ∥H ≤



1 + 30 γσ∗

max {1, d max /σ ∗}



β, r = 1 , . . . , s − 1,

for distinct indices k1, . . . , k s−1. Let Hs−1 := span { ˆf (i1), . . . , ˆf (is−1)} and let Ps−1 be the orthog-onal projection onto Hs−1. Define residuals 

ˆf (i)(s) := ( I − Ps−1) ˆf (i), g(s),k := ( I − Ps−1)gk.

Let S(s) := conv {g(s),1, . . . , g (s),K } ⊂ H and define the ε-simplicial neighborhoods inside S(s) by 

V(s),k (ε) := 

n KX

> ℓ=1

πℓg(s),ℓ : π ∈ ∆K−1, π k ≥ 1 − ε

o

, 1 ≤ k ≤ K. 

Let 

d(s)max := max  

> ˆf∈S (s)

∥ ˆf ∥H = max  

> 1≤k≤K

∥g(s),k ∥H, K∗ 

> (s)

:= 

n

k : ∥g(s),k ∥H = d(s)max 

o

,

and, for h0 > 0,

K(s)(h0) := 

n

k : ∥g(s),k ∥H ≥ d(s)max − h0

o

, V(s)(ε0, h 0) := [

> k∈K (s)(h0)

V(s),k (ε0).

Since I−Ps−1 is an orthogonal projector and hence a contraction, ∥(I−Ps−1)h1−(I−Ps−1)h2∥H ≤∥h1 − h2∥H for all h1, h 2 ∈ H . Therefore, with β = β( ˆf , G ),

max  

> 1≤i≤m

Dist H( ˆf (i)(s), S(s)) ≤ β, max  

> 1≤k≤K

min  

> 1≤i≤m

∥ ˆf (i)(s) − g(s),k ∥H ≤ β. (A22) Additionally, we have the following lemma. 44 Lemma A7. Under the induction hypothesis and the assumptions of Theorem A1, we have 

d(s)max ≥ σ∗/2, min  

> k̸=ℓk,ℓ / ∈{ k1,...,k s−1}

∥g(s),k − g(s),ℓ ∥H ≥ √2 σ∗, kr /∈ K (s)(h0) for r = 1 , . . . , s − 1.

(A23) We then apply Lemma A5 to the projected simplex. Similarly as in Step 1, choose 

h0 = σ∗/3, ε1 = 15 max {σ−1 

> ∗

, σ −2 

> ∗

d(s)max }β, t = 7 β/ 3.

Note that ε1 ≤ ε0 as d(s)max ≤ dmax . We get 

max  

> ˆf∈S (s)\V (s)(ε0,h 0)

∥ ˆf ∥H ≤ max  

> ˆf∈S (s)\V (s)(ε1,h 0)

∥ ˆf ∥H ≤ d(s)max − 7β/ 3. (A24) Let is := arg max i ∥ ˆf (i)(s)∥H be the index selected by SPA in the s-th iteration. By (A22), for any 

k ∈ K ∗ 

> (s)

there exists i∗ such that ∥ ˆf (i∗)(s) − g(s),k ∥H ≤ β, and hence 

∥ ˆf (i∗)(s) ∥H ≥ ∥ g(s),k ∥H − β = d(s)max − β. 

Since ∥ ˆf (is)(s) ∥H = max i ∥ ˆf (i)(s)∥H, we obtain 

∥ ˆf (is)(s) ∥H ≥ d(s)max − β. (A25) Combining (A24) and (A25), we conclude that ˆf (is)(s) /∈ S (s) \ V (s)(ε0, h 0); namely, 

ˆf (is)(s) ∈ V (s)(ε0, h 0) or ˆf (is)(s) /∈ S (s). (A26) In both cases, we route through the projection onto S. By (A22), Dist H( ˆf (is), S) ≤ β, so 

∥ ˆf (is) − proj S ( ˆf (is))∥H ≤ β. 

First consider ˆf (is)(s) ∈ V (s)(ε0, h 0). Since {V (s),k (ε0)}k∈K (s)(h0) are disjoint, there exists a unique 

ks ∈ K (s)(h0) such that ˆf (is)(s) ∈ V (s),k s (ε0), meaning ˆf (is)(s) = PKℓ=1 πℓg(s),ℓ with πks ≥ 1 − ε0. Since 

(I − Ps−1) does not change the weights, proj S ( ˆf (is)) lies in Vks (ε0). By Lemma A1, 

∥proj S ( ˆf (is)) − gks ∥H ≤ 2γ ε 0. (A27) 45 Now consider ˆf (is)(s) /∈ S (s). Let proj S(s) ( ˆf (is)(s) ) denote the closest point to ˆf (is)(s) in S(s). By (A22), 

∥ ˆf (is)(s) − proj S(s) ( ˆf (is)(s) )∥H ≤ β. 

Combining this with (A25) yields 

∥proj S(s) ( ˆf (is)(s) )∥H ≥ ∥ ˆf (is)(s) ∥H − β ≥ d(s)max − 2β. 

Together with (A24), this implies proj S(s) ( ˆf (is)(s) ) ∈ V (s)(ε0, h 0). Therefore, there exists a unique 

ks ∈ K (s)(h0) such that proj S(s) ( ˆf (is)(s) ) ∈ V (s),k s (ε0), which implies proj S ( ˆf (is)) ∈ V ks (ε0). By Lemma A1, 

∥proj S ( ˆf (is)) − gks ∥H ≤ 2γ ε 0. (A28) In both cases, combining with the triangle inequality gives 

∥ ˆf (is) − gks ∥H ≤ ∥ ˆf (is) − proj S ( ˆf (is))∥H + ∥proj S ( ˆf (is)) − gks ∥H ≤ β + 2 γ ε 0.

Therefore, 

∥ ˆf (is) − gks ∥H ≤ β + 2 γ ε 0 ≤



1 + 30 γσ∗

max {1, d max /σ ∗}



β. (A29) In particular, ks /∈ { k1, . . . , k s−1} by (A23). This completes the induction. 

Denoising parameters and proof of Theorem 1. Recall from Assumption 5 the near-pure count Mk(δm) := |{ 1 ≤ i ≤ m : πik ≥ 1 − δm}| and that min 1≤k≤K Mk(δm) ≥ 1. We specify the denoising parameters (N, ∆) as follows: 

∆ = C δm γ(G) + n(a−r)/2min 

, N = ⌊c min  

> 1≤k≤K

Mk(δm)⌋, (A30) for a sufficiently large constant C ≥ 5 and a constant 0 < c ≤ 1. The neighborhood radius 

∆ is proportional to the sum of the purity error and the estimation error, and vanishes under Assumptions 4–5. The pruning threshold N is set as a fraction of the smallest near-pure count across all vertices, ensuring that near-vertex studies are not pruned. When min k Mk(δm) = 1 

(only one near-pure study per vertex), we have N = 1 , so no function is pruned and only the averaging step is applied. When min k Mk(δm) ≫ 1 (many near-pure studies per vertex), the pruning threshold is larger and the denoising step can remove outlying functions. 

Proof of Theorem 1. Let ˆf ∗,(1) , . . . , ˆf ∗,(m′) denote the denoised functions output by the denoising step of Algorithm 1, where m′ ≤ m is the number of retained functions. Write γ := γ(G),

dmax := dmax (G), and εn := max 1≤i≤m ∥ϵ(i)∥H. By Lemma A6, εn = oP (1) . The proof shows 46 that β( ˆf ∗, G ) = oP (1) after the denoising step, verifies the condition of Theorem A1, and then applies the finite-sample error bound. 

Step 1: Distance to S is preserved after averaging. For each retained function 

ˆf ∗,(i), let Ni := {j : ∥ ˆf (j) − ˆf (i)∥H ≤ ∆} be its ∆-neighborhood. By construction, ˆf ∗,(i) =

|N i|−1 P

> j∈N i

ˆf (j). For each j, since f (j) ∈ S , we have Dist H( ˆf (j), S) ≤ ∥ ϵ(j)∥H. Let sj := proj S ( ˆf (j)) for each j ∈ N i. Since S is convex, ¯s := |N i|−1 P 

> j∈N i

sj ∈ S . Therefore, 

Dist H( ˆf ∗,(i), S) ≤ ∥ ˆf ∗,(i) − ¯s∥H ≤ 1

|N i|

X

> j∈N i

∥ ˆf (j) − sj ∥H ≤ εn.

Step 2: Near-vertex studies survive pruning. Fix k ∈ { 1, . . . , K } and let Ik := {i :

πik ≥ 1 − δm}, so |Ik| = Mk(δm) ≥ N/c ≥ N . For any i, j ∈ Ik, since πik , π jk ≥ 1 − δm, we have 

P 

> ℓ̸=k

πiℓ ≤ δm and P 

> ℓ̸=k

πjℓ ≤ δm. Hence ∥πi − πj ∥1 ≤ 4δm, and by Lemma A1, 

∥f (i) − f (j)∥H = ∥Gπi − Gπj ∥H ≤ γ ∥πi − πj ∥1 ≤ 4 γ δ m.

By the triangle inequality, ∥ ˆf (i) − ˆf (j)∥H ≤ 4 γ δ m + 2 εn. With the choice of ∆ in (A30), 

4γδ m + 2 εn ≤ ∆ with probability tending to one. Therefore, all studies in Ik are mutual ∆-neighbors, and each has |N i| ≥ | Ik| ≥ N , so none is pruned. 

Step 3: Denoised near-vertex functions are close to vertices. Let ik ∈ Ik be the index achieving min i(1 − πik ). Since ik is retained (by Step 2) and ∥ ˆf (j) − ˆf (ik )∥H ≤ ∆ for all 

j ∈ N ik , we have for each such j,

∥ ˆf (j) − gk∥H ≤ ∥ ˆf (j) − ˆf (ik )∥H + ∥ ˆf (ik ) − gk∥H ≤ ∆ + 2 δm dmax + εn.

Since ˆf ∗,(ik ) is the average over Nik , the triangle inequality yields 

∥ ˆf ∗,(ik ) − gk∥H ≤ ∆ + 2 δm dmax + εn.

Step 4: Controlling β and applying Theorem A1. Steps 1 and 3 give 

β( ˆf ∗, G ) ≤ ∆ + 2 δm dmax + εn = OP

 δm γ + n(a−r)/2min + δm dmax 

 = oP (1) ,

where the last equality uses Assumptions 4 and 5. By the non-degeneracy condition in As-sumption 1, σ∗ > 0. Since the basis functions {gk}Kk=1 are fixed, σ∗, dmax , and γ are positive constants that do not depend on m or ni. Therefore, the condition (A3) of Theorem A1 is satisfied with probability tending to one. On this event, Theorem A1 applied to the denoised 47 functions ˆf ∗,(1) , . . . , ˆf ∗,(m′) yields, up to permutation, 

max  

> 1≤k≤K

∥ˆgk − gk∥H ≤ 1 + 30 γσ∗

max 

n

1, dmax 

σ∗

o!| {z } 

> =: C0

β( ˆf ∗, G ) = oP (1) ,

since C0 is a fixed constant depending only on the basis functions. It remains to extend the conclusion from the case ˆK = K to general ˆK. Since d-fSPA is a greedy iterative algorithm, the first j selections depend only on j and not on the total number of iterations. Therefore, running SPA for ˆK iterations produces the same first min( K, ˆK) selections as running for K iterations. Combined with the bound for the K-iteration case, this yields 

max  

> 1≤k≤min( K, ˆK)

∥ˆgk − gk∥H ≤ C0 β( ˆf ∗, G ) = oP (1) .

A.1.4 Proof of preliminary lemmas 

Proof of Lemma A1. Fix π, ˜π ∈ ∆K−1 and set a := π−˜π ∈ RK . Since 1⊤a = PKk=1 (πk −˜πk) = 0 ,we have 

Ga =

> K

X

> k=1

akgk =

> K

X

> k=1

ak ˜gk = ˜Ga. 

Therefore, 

∥Gπ − G˜π∥2 

> H

= ∥ ˜Ga ∥2 

> H

= ⟨ ˜Ga, ˜Ga ⟩ = ⟨a, ˜G∗ ˜Ga ⟩ = a⊤ ˜Γ a. 

Since ˜Γ is symmetric positive semidefinite and rank( ˜Γ) ≤ K − 1, the Rayleigh quotient bound yields 

a⊤ ˜Γ a ≥ λK−1(˜Γ) ∥a∥22,

where λK−1(˜Γ) denotes the smallest nonzero eigenvalue (equivalently, the (K − 1) -th largest eigenvalue) of ˜Γ. Taking square roots gives the lower bound. For the upper bound in (A5), fix any g0 ∈ S . Since PKk=1 ak = 0 , we have PKk=1 akgk =

PKk=1 ak(gk − g0). By the triangle inequality, 

∥Gπ − G˜π∥H =

> K

X

> k=1

ak(gk − g0) H

≤

> K

X

> k=1

|ak| ∥ gk − g0∥H ≤ max  

> 1≤k≤K

∥gk − g0∥H · ∥ π − ˜π∥1.

Minimizing the right-hand side over g0 ∈ S yields γ(G) ∥π − ˜π∥1.We now prove (A6). Fix 1 ≤ s ≤ K − 2 and suppose π and ˜π share at least s common 48 entries. Let I ⊂ { 1, . . . , K } be a set of indices with |I| = s such that πk = ˜ πk for all k ∈ I, and let J := Ic so |J| = K − s. Then aI = 0 and hence 

∥Gπ − G˜π∥2 

> H

= a⊤ ˜Γa = a⊤ 

> J

˜ΓJJ aJ ,

where ˜ΓJJ is the principal submatrix of ˜Γ indexed by J. Since 1⊤a = 0 and aI = 0 , we have 

1⊤ 

> J

aJ = 0 , so aJ lies in the (K − s − 1) -dimensional subspace {v ∈ RK−s : 1⊤ 

> J

v = 0 }. By the Rayleigh quotient bound restricted to this subspace, 

a⊤ 

> J

˜ΓJJ aJ ≥ λK−s−1(˜ΓJJ ) ∥aJ ∥22,

where λK−s−1(˜ΓJJ ) denotes the (K − s − 1) -th largest eigenvalue of the (K − s) × (K − s) matrix 

˜ΓJJ . By the Cauchy interlacing theorem for eigenvalues of a symmetric matrix and its principal submatrices, λK−s−1(˜ΓJJ ) ≥ λK−1(˜Γ) = σ2 

> ∗

. In particular, λK−s−1(˜ΓJJ ) ≥ λK−1−s(˜Γ) . This, together with ∥aJ ∥2 = ∥a∥2 = ∥π − ˜π∥2, yields 

∥Gπ − G˜π∥H ≥

»

λK−1−s(˜Γ) ∥π − ˜π∥2.

Proof of Lemma A2. Write 

f := 

> K

X

> k=1

πkgk ∈ H , L := 

> K

X

> k=1

πk∥gk∥H.

By the triangle inequality, ∥f ∥H ≤ L. We aim to lower bound L − ∥ f ∥H.First expand ∥f ∥2 

> H

using bilinearity of the inner product: 

∥f ∥2 

> H

=

D KX

> i=1

πigi,

> K

X

> j=1

πj gj

E

=

> K

X

> i=1

π2 

> i

∥gi∥2 

> H

+ X

> i̸=j

πiπj ⟨gi, g j ⟩. (A31) Next, we use the following identity, valid in any inner product space: for any u, v ∈ H ,

2⟨u, v ⟩ = 2 ∥u∥H∥v∥H + ( ∥u∥H − ∥ v∥H)2 − ∥ u − v∥2

> H

. (A32) Applying (A32) with u = gi and v = gj , and using the definitions of a and b, we have for all 

i̸ = j,

(∥gi∥H − ∥ gj ∥H)2 ≤ b2, ∥gi − gj ∥2 

> H

≥ a2,

49 hence 

⟨gi, g j ⟩ ≤ ∥ gi∥H∥gj ∥H − a2 − b2

2 . (A33) Plugging (A33) into (A31) yields 

∥f ∥2 

> H

≤

> K

X

> i=1

π2 

> i

∥gi∥2 

> H

+ X

> i̸=j

πiπj



∥gi∥H∥gj ∥H − a2 − b2

2



=

 KX

> i=1

πi∥gi∥H

2

− a2 − b2

2

X

> i̸=j

πiπj

= L2 − a2 − b2

2

X

> i̸=j

πiπj . (A34) Since P  

> j̸=i

πj = 1 − πi, we have 

X

> i̸=j

πiπj =

> K

X

> i=1

πi

X 

> j̸=i

πj =

> K

X

> i=1

πi(1 − πi).

Combining this with (A34) gives 

∥f ∥2 

> H

≤ L2 − a2 − b2

2

> K

X

> i=1

πi(1 − πi). (A35) Finally, note that L + ∥f ∥H ≤ 2L (since ∥f ∥H ≤ L). Therefore, 

L − ∥ f ∥H = L2 − ∥ f ∥2

> H

L + ∥f ∥H

≥ L2 − ∥ f ∥2

> H

2L .

Using (A35) in the numerator yields 

L − ∥ f ∥H ≥ a2 − b2

4L

> K

X

> i=1

πi(1 − πi).

Proof of Lemma A3. Write ΓP = G∗G − G∗P G = Γ − B with B := G∗P G . Since P is an orthogonal projection, it is positive semi-definite. Hence for any a ∈ RK ,

a⊤Ba = ⟨P Ga, Ga ⟩H = ⟨P Ga, P Ga ⟩H = ∥P Ga ∥2 

> H

≥ 0,

so B ⪰ 0. Moreover, rank( B) ≤ rank( P ) = s. A standard eigenvalue inequality for a rank-s

50 positive semi-definite perturbation (e.g., Weyl-type interlacing for A − B with rank( B) ≤ s)yields 

λK−1−s(Γ P ) = λK−1−s(Γ − B) ≥ λK−1(Γ) .

Proof of Lemma A4. Write ℓmax := max 1≤k≤K ∥gk∥H. By assumption, there exist indices {k1, . . . , k s}

such that ∥gkj ∥H ≤ δ for j = 1 , . . . , s . Hence 

> K

X

> k=1

∥gk∥2 

> H

≤ sδ 2 + ( K − s)ℓ2max . (A36) On the other hand, 

> K

X

> k=1

∥gk∥2 

> H

=

> K

X

> k=1

⟨gk, g k⟩ = trace(Γ) = 

> K

X

> j=1

λj (Γ) .

Since λ1(Γ) ≥ · · · ≥ λK (Γ) ≥ 0, we have 

trace(Γ) = 

> K

X

> j=1

λj (Γ) ≥

> K−1−s

X

> j=1

λj (Γ) ≥ (K − 1 − s)λK−1−s(Γ) . (A37) Combining (A36)–(A37) yields 

sδ 2 + ( K − s)ℓ2max ≥ (K − 1 − s)λK−1−s(Γ) ,

and therefore 

ℓ2max ≥ (K − s − 1) λK−1−s(Γ) − sδ 2

K − s . (A38) Recall that λK−1−s(Γ) ≥ 2( K − 2) δ2. Since the function s/ (K − s − 1) is increasing in s over 

1 ≤ s ≤ K − 2, we have 

sK − s − 1 ≤ K − 2 =⇒ 2 sK − s − 1δ2 ≤ 2( K − 2) δ2 ≤ λK−1−s(Γ) .

Equivalently, 

sδ 2 ≤ K − s − 12 λK−1−s(Γ) .

Substituting this bound into (A38) gives 

ℓ2max ≥ (K − s − 1) λK−1−s(Γ) − K−s−12 λK−1−s(Γ) 

K − s = K − s − 12( K − s) λK−1−s(Γ) .

51 Taking square roots, 

ℓmax ≥ K − s − 12( K − s)

»

λK−1−s(Γ) .

Finally, since 1 ≤ K −s−1 ≤ K −s for 0 ≤ s ≤ K −2, we have p(K − s − 1) /(2( K − s)) ≥ 1/2,which implies 

ℓmax ≥ 12

»

λK−1−s(Γ) .

Proof of Lemma A5. Write K = K(h0), Vk = Vk(ε0), and V = V(ε0, h 0) for short. By definition of K,

dmax − h0 ≤ ∥ gk∥H ≤ dmax for k ∈ K , ∥gk∥H ≤ dmax − h0 for k / ∈ K . (A39) Fix any f ∈ S \ V . There exist π ∈ ∆K−1 such that f = PKk=1 πkgk. Since f /∈ V =

∪k∈K Vk(ε0), we have 

max  

> k∈K

πk ≤ 1 − ε0. (A40) Define 

ρ := X

> k∈K

πk, η := 



ρ−1 P 

> k∈K

πkgk, ρ̸ = 0 ,

0, ρ = 0 .

(A41) Then f can be written as f = ρη + P 

> k / ∈K

πkgk, and by the triangle inequality together with (A39), 

∥f ∥H ≤ ρ∥η∥H + X

> k / ∈K

πk∥gk∥H ≤ ρ∥η∥H + (1 − ρ)( dmax − h0). (A42) We then consider two cases. Case 1: 1 − ρ ≥ ε0/2. Since ∥η∥H ≤ dmax (as η ∈ S when ρ > 0), (A42) gives 

∥f ∥H ≤ ρd max + (1 − ρ)( dmax − h0) = dmax − (1 − ρ)h0 ≤ dmax − h0ε0

2 . (A43) Case 2: 1 − ρ < ε 0/2. We first claim that |K| ≥ 2. If K = {k∗} is a singleton, then ρ = πk∗

and (A40) yields ρ ≤ 1 − ε0, hence 1 − ρ ≥ ε0, contradicting 1 − ρ < ε 0/2. Thus, η is a convex combination of at least two points in {gk : k ∈ K} . Apply Lemma A2 to the family {gk : k ∈ K} 

with weights wk := πk/ρ (so P 

> k∈K

wk = 1 ) and with 

a := min  

> k̸=ℓk,ℓ ∈K

∥gk − gℓ∥H ≥ √2 σ∗, b := max  

> k̸=ℓk,ℓ ∈K

∥gk∥H − ∥ gℓ∥H ≤ h0,

52 where we used the separation assumption restricted to vertices in K(h0) and (A39). (Note that the proof only requires the separation condition among vertices in K(h0), not among all K

vertices.) Let L := P 

> k∈K

wk∥gk∥H ≤ dmax . Lemma A2 yields 

∥η∥H ≤ L − a2 − b2

4L

X

> k∈K

wk(1 − wk) ≤ dmax − 2σ2 

> ∗

− h20

4dmax 

X

> k∈K

wk(1 − wk). (A44) Since wk = πk/ρ , we have P 

> k∈K

wk(1 − wk) = P 

> k∈K

wk(1 − ρ−1πk). Moreover, for each k ∈ K ,using (A40) and 1 − ρ = P 

> j / ∈K

πj ,

1 − ρ−1πk = ρ−1(1 − πk) − ρ−1(1 − ρ) ≥ ρ−1 ε0 − (1 − ρ).

Plugging this into (A44) and using P 

> k∈K

wk = 1 gives 

∥η∥H ≤ dmax − (2 σ2 

> ∗

− h20) ε0 − (1 − ρ)

4ρd max 

. (A45) Since 1 − ρ < ε 0/2, we have ε0 − (1 − ρ) ≥ ε0/2, hence 

∥η∥H ≤ dmax − (2 σ2 

> ∗

− h20)ε0

8ρd max 

.

Substitute this bound into (A42) and use 1 − ρ ≥ 0:

∥f ∥H ≤ ρ



dmax − (2 σ2 

> ∗

− h20)ε0

8ρd max 



+ (1 − ρ)( dmax − h0)

≤ ρ



dmax − (2 σ2 

> ∗

− h20)ε0

8ρd max 



+ (1 − ρ)dmax = dmax − (2 σ2 

> ∗

− h20)ε0

8dmax 

. (A46) Combining (A43) (Case 1) and (A46) (Case 2), and setting h0 = σ∗/3, we obtain for all 

f ∈ S \ V (ε0, h 0),

∥f ∥H ≤ dmax − min 

nσ∗

6 , 17 σ2

> ∗

72 dmax 

o

ε0 ≤ dmax − min 

nσ∗

6 , σ2

> ∗

6dmax 

o

ε0,

where the second inequality uses 17 /72 > 1/6. Therefore, a sufficient condition for ∥f ∥H ≤

dmax − t is 

min 

nσ∗

6 , σ2

> ∗

6dmax 

o

ε0 ≥ t ⇐⇒ ε0 ≥ 6σ−1 

> ∗

max 

n

1, dmax 

σ∗

o

t. 

Proof of Lemma A7. Fix an iteration index s ∈ { 2, . . . , K } and adopt the notation in Step 2 of 53 the proof of Theorem A1. Define the projected operator G(s) : RK → H by G(s) := ( I − Ps−1)G,so G(s)ek = g(s),k . Let the corresponding Gram matrix be Γ(s) := G∗

> (s)

G(s) and let eΓ(s) := eG∗ 

> (s)

eG(s)

be the centered Gram matrix, where eG(s) := ( I − Ps−1) eG.Since Ps−1 is an orthogonal projection with rank( Ps−1) = s − 1, Lemma A3 eG with P = Ps−1

and with s replaced by s − 1) yields 

λK−1−(s−1) 

 eΓ(s)

 ≥ λK−1(eΓ) = σ2 

> ∗

. (A47) Fix k̸ = ℓ with k, ℓ / ∈ { k1, . . . , k s−1}. Consider π = ek and ˜π = eℓ. They share at least (s − 1) 

common entries (indeed, they share zeros on all indices in {k1, . . . , k s−1}), so Lemma A1 applied to the mapping π 7 → G(s)π gives 

∥g(s),k − g(s),ℓ ∥H = ∥G(s)ek − G(s)eℓ∥H ≥

»

λK−1−(s−1) 

 eΓ(s)

 ∥ek − eℓ∥2 ≥ √2 σ∗.

This holds by (A47) and ∥ek − eℓ∥2 = √2. This proves the second claim. Let d(s)max := max 1≤k≤K ∥g(s),k ∥H. By construction, for each already-selected vertex index 

kr (r = 1 , . . . , s − 1), the residual norm ∥g(s),k r ∥H is small. Specifically, it equals the norm of the component of gkr orthogonal to Hs−1, and the induction hypothesis ensures gkr is well-approximated by ˆf (ir ) ∈ H s−1. This gives an upper bound 

∥g(s),k r ∥H ≤ ¯∆ (r = 1 , . . . , s − 1) . (A48) for ¯∆ := 



1 + 30 γσ∗ max {1, d max /σ ∗}



β.Apply Lemma A4 with s replaced by (s − 1) , with the indices {k1, . . . , k s−1}, and with 

δ = ¯∆. Note that Lemma A4 involves the un-centered Gram matrix Γ(s); since eΓ(s) = CΓ(s)C

where C = I − 1 

> K

11 ⊤ is the centering matrix with eigenvalues in {0, 1}, Cauchy interlacing gives λj (Γ (s)) ≥ λj (eΓ(s)) for all j. In particular, λK−s(Γ (s)) ≥ λK−s(eΓ(s)) ≥ σ2 

> ∗

. We now verify that σ2 

> ∗

≥ 2( K − 2) ¯∆2. From the theorem condition (A3), β ≤ σ2 

> ∗

/{450 dmax max(1 , d max /σ ∗)}.Since γ(G) ≤ dmax (G), we have ¯∆ ≤ { 1 + 30 dmax σ−1 

> ∗

max(1 , d max /σ ∗)}β ≤ β + σ∗/15 , so ¯∆2 ≤

2β2 +2 σ2 

> ∗

/225 . For the given K and β sufficiently small (ensured by (A3)), 2( K −2) ¯∆2 ≤ σ2 

> ∗

. The constant 450 in (A3) is chosen large enough to guarantee this inequality. Applying Lemma A4 yields 

d(s)max = max  

> 1≤k≤K

∥g(s),k ∥H ≥ 12

»

λK−1−(s−1) 

 eΓ(s)

 ≥ σ∗

2 .

This proves the first claim. Recall K(s)(h0) := {k : ∥g(s),k ∥H ≥ d(s)max − h0} with h0 = σ∗/3. From the previous step, 

d(s)max ≥ σ∗/2, and from (A48), ∥g(s),k r ∥H ≤ ¯∆ for r = 1 , . . . , s − 1. Under the theorem condition, 54 ¯∆ ≤ 310 d(s)max ≤ d(s)max − 720 σ∗, so in particular ∥g(s),k r ∥H < d (s)max − h0 (since h0 = σ∗/3). Therefore 

kr /∈ K (s)(h0) for all r = 1 , . . . , s − 1, proving the third claim. 

Proof of Lemma A6. We bound each term in the definition of β( ˆf , G ) separately. 

First term. Since f (i) ∈ S for every i by Assumption 1, we have 

Dist H( ˆf (i), S) ≤ ∥ ˆf (i) − f (i)∥H = ∥ϵ(i)∥H,

and therefore max 1≤i≤m Dist H( ˆf (i), S) ≤ max 1≤i≤m ∥ϵ(i)∥H.

Second term. For any fixed k and any study i, the triangle inequality gives ∥ ˆf (i) − gk∥H ≤∥f (i) − gk∥H + ∥ϵ(i)∥H. Taking min i and then max k yields 

max  

> 1≤k≤K

min  

> 1≤i≤m

∥ ˆf (i) − gk∥H ≤ max  

> 1≤k≤K

min  

> 1≤i≤m

∥f (i) − gk∥H + max  

> 1≤i≤m

∥ϵ(i)∥H. (A49) Using f (i) = PKℓ=1 πiℓ gℓ, we have f (i) − gk = P 

> ℓ̸=k

πiℓ (gℓ − gk), so 

∥f (i) − gk∥H ≤ X

> ℓ̸=k

πiℓ ∥gℓ − gk∥H ≤ (1 − πik ) · 2 dmax (G),

where the last inequality uses ∥gℓ − gk∥H ≤ ∥ gℓ∥H + ∥gk∥H ≤ 2 dmax (G). Taking min i and then 

max k gives 

max  

> 1≤k≤K

min  

> 1≤i≤m

∥f (i) − gk∥H ≤ 2 δm dmax (G). (A50) 

Combining. From (A49) and (A50), we obtain the deterministic bound 

β( ˆf , G ) ≤ max  

> 1≤i≤m

∥ϵ(i)∥H + 2 δm dmax (G). (A51) 

Controlling max i ∥ϵ(i)∥H. Since ∥·∥ H is the L2(μ) norm, Tonelli’s theorem and Assumption 4(a) yield 

E∥ϵ(i)∥2 

> H

=

Z

> X

E[ϵ(i)(x)2] dμ (x) ≤ sup 

> x∈X

E[ϵ(i)(x)2] = O(n−ri ).

By Markov’s inequality and the union bound, for any t > 0,

Pr 



max  

> 1≤i≤m

∥ϵ(i)∥H > t 



≤

> m

X

> i=1

E∥ϵ(i)∥2

> H

t2 ≤ C m n −r

> min

t2 ,

for some constant C > 0, where nmin := inf i ni. Setting t = n(a−r)/2min with 0 < a < r from 55 Assumption 4(b) gives t → 0 and 

C m n −r

> min

t2 = C m n −a 

> min

= o(1) ,

where the last step follows from Assumption 4(b). Hence max 1≤i≤m ∥ϵ(i)∥H = OP (n(a−r)/2min ) = 

oP (1) .Since δm dmax (G) = o(1) by Assumption 5, combining with (A51) yields β( ˆf , G ) = oP (1) .

## A.2 Proof of Theorem 2 

To establish a coverage guarantee for the split conformal interval Cα(x), we must address a key challenge: the study-level oracle functions f (i)(x) are not observed. Instead, we only observe noisy estimates ˆf (i)(x), and the resulting estimation error propagates into the conformity scores. Let us fix an evaluation point x ∈ X . Recall that the within-study estimation error is given by ϵ(i)(x) = ˆf (i)(x) − f (i)(x). Define nmin := inf i ni to be the smallest sample size across all observed studies. We will control the maximal estimation error across studies through the event 

En(x) := 

n

max  

> 1≤i≤m

|ϵ(i)(x)| ≤ cn

o

,

for a deterministic sequence cn → 0 to be specified. The next lemma shows that, under As-sumption 4, the event En(x) occurs with probability tending to one. 

Lemma A8. Under Assumption 4, there exists a deterministic sequence cn → 0 such that 

Pr ( En(x)) → 1.

Equivalently, max 1≤i≤m |ϵ(i)(x)| = op(1) for any fixed x ∈ X .Proof of Lemma A8. We fix x ∈ X throughout. By the union bound, 

Pr 



max  

> 1≤i≤m

|ϵ(i)(x)| > c n



≤

> m

X

> i=1

Pr  |ϵ(i)(x)| > c n

.

By Markov’s inequality and Assumption 4(a), for each i, we have 

Pr  |ϵ(i)(x)| > c n

 ≤ E{ϵ(i)(x)2}

c2

> n

≤ C n −ri

c2

> n

≤ C n −r

> min

c2

> n

,

56 for some constant C > 0. Therefore, 

Pr 



max  

> 1≤i≤m

|ϵ(i)(x)| > c n



≤ C m n −r

> min

c2

> n

.

Now set cn := n(a−r)/2min , where 0 < a < r is the constant from Assumption 4(b). Then cn → 0 as 

nmin → ∞ . This, together with Assumption 4(b), ensures 

Pr 



max  

> 1≤i≤m

|ϵ(i)(x)| > c n



≤ C m n −a 

> min

= o(1) .

Thus, Pr( En(x)) → 1.

Proof of Theorem 2. Again, fix x ∈ X throughout. We start by considering an oracle bench-mark in which the study-level oracle functions in the calibration set {f (i)(x)}i∈I cal are directly observed. In this setting, we have an exact finite-sample marginal coverage guarantee for the split conformal procedure under exchangeability. Let q⋆

> 1−α

(x) and C⋆α(x) denote, respectively, the oracle quantile and prediction interval constructed by Algorithm 2, with the estimated functions in the calibration set { ˆf (i)(·)}i∈I cal replaced by the oracle functions {f (i)(·)}i∈I cal .By Assumptions 1– 3, the collection (Wi, πi, f (i)(x)) i∈I cal ∪{ 0} is jointly exchangeable across studies. Consequently, by the classical split conformal prediction guarantee (see Proposition 2.4 of Vovk et al. [2005]), the oracle prediction interval satisfies 

Pr ¶f (0) (x) ∈ C⋆α(x)© ≥ 1 − α. (A52) Next, we relate the oracle conformity scores to their observed counterparts. Recall that the conformity scores used in Algorithm 2 are computed from the estimated functions. For each study i ∈ I cal , the observed and oracle residuals are computed as 

ri(x) = ˆf (i)(x) − ˜f (i)(x) , r⋆i (x) = f (i)(x) − ˜f (i)(x) .

By the reverse triangle inequality, 

ri(x) − r⋆i (x) ≤ ˆf (i)(x) − ˜f (i)(x) −  f (i)(x) − ˜f (i)(x) = |ϵ(i)(x)|. (A53) Conditioning on the event En(x) = {max 1≤i≤m |ϵ(i)(x)| ≤ cn}, inequality (A53) implies the uniform control 

max 

> i∈I cal

ri(x) − r⋆i (x) ≤ max  

> 1≤i≤m

|ϵ(i)(x)| ≤ cn.

57 This uniform bound entails a corresponding stability property for empirical quantiles. Specifi-cally, conditioning on En(x), we have 

(1 − α)th quantile of r⋆i (x) ≤ (1 − α)th quantile of ri(x) + cn,

(1 − α)th quantile of r⋆i (x) ≥ (1 − α)th quantile of ri(x) − cn.

This implies 

q1−α(x) − q⋆

> 1−α

(x) ≤ cn.

Recall that the feasible intervals are given by 

Cα(x) =  ˜f (0) (x)−q1−α(x), ˜f (0) (x)+ q1−α(x), C⋆α(x) =  ˜f (0) (x)−q⋆

> 1−α

(x), ˜f (0) (x)+ q⋆

> 1−α

(x).

Conditioning on the event En(x), we have q1−α(x) ≤ q⋆

> 1−α

(x) + cn, and hence the oracle interval is contained in a cn-enlargement of the feasible interval: 

C⋆α(x) ⊆  ˜f (0) (x) − (q1−α(x) + cn), ˜f (0) (x) + ( q1−α(x) + cn) on En(x).

This implies that 

Pr Ä|f (0) (x) − ˜f (0) (x)| ≤ q1−α(x) + cn

ä ≥ Pr Äf (0) (x) ∈ C⋆α(x), En(x)ä .

By the union bound, 

Pr Äf (0) (x) ∈ C⋆α(x), En(x)ä ≥ Pr Äf (0) (x) ∈ C⋆α(x)ä − Pr( En(x)c) .

Applying the oracle split conformal guarantee (A52) yields 

Pr Ä|f (0) (x) − ˜f (0) (x)| ≤ q1−α(x) + cn

ä ≥ (1 − α) − Pr( En(x)c) .

Finally, by Lemma A8 we have Pr( En(x)c) → 0 and also cn → 0. It remains to pass from the 

cn-enlarged interval to Cα(x) itself. On En(x), we also have q1−α(x) ≥ q⋆

> 1−α

(x) − cn, so 

Pr Äf (0) (x) ∈ Cα(x)ä ≥ Pr Ä|f (0) (x) − ˜f (0) (x)| ≤ q⋆

> 1−α

(x) − cn, En(x)ä .

The right-hand side is bounded below by 

Pr Äf (0) (x) ∈ C⋆α(x)ä − Pr Äq⋆

> 1−α

(x) − cn < |f (0) (x) − ˜f (0) (x)| ≤ q⋆

> 1−α

(x)ä − Pr( En(x)c) .

58 The first term is ≥ 1 − α by (A52). The third term vanishes by Lemma A8. The second term is the probability mass in a strip of width cn → 0 around the oracle quantile boundary. Under Assumption 2, the conditional distribution of f (0) (x) given the training and calibration data is continuous (e.g., when π0 has a density on ∆K−1), so this term vanishes as well. Therefore, 

lim Pr( f (0) (x) ∈ Cα(x)) ≥ 1 − α.

## A.3 Proof of Corollary 1 

Define the functional estimation error 

ϵ(i)Φ := Φ( ˆf (i)) − Φ( f (i)).

The proof follows the same strategy as the proof of Theorem 2, with ϵ(i)(x) replaced by ϵ(i)Φ .The key step is to establish the analogue of Lemma A8 for the functional estimation error. 

Lemma A9. Under the conditions of Corollary 1, there exists a deterministic sequence cn → 0

such that 

Pr 

Å

max  

> 1≤i≤m

|ϵ(i)Φ | > c n

ã

→ 0.

Proof of Lemma A9. By the Lipschitz condition on Φ, for each i,

|ϵ(i)Φ | ≤ LΦ∥ ˆf (i) − f (i)∥L2(P0,X ).

By Markov’s inequality, 

Pr  |ϵ(i)Φ | > c n

 ≤ L2Φ E∥ ˆf (i) − f (i)∥2 

> L2(P0,X)



c2

> n

.

By Fubini’s theorem and Assumption 4(a), 

E∥ ˆf (i) − f (i)∥2 

> L2(P0,X)

 =

Z

> X

Eϵ(i)(x)2 dP0,X (x) ≤ C n −ri .

Therefore, by the union bound, 

Pr 



max  

> 1≤i≤m

|ϵ(i)Φ | > c n



≤ L2Φ C m n −r

> min

c2

> n

.

59 Setting cn = n(a−r)/2min with 0 < a < r from Assumption 4(b), we have cn → 0 and 

Pr 



max  

> 1≤i≤m

|ϵ(i)Φ | > c n



≤ L2Φ C m n −a 

> min

= o(1) ,

where the last step follows from Assumption 4(b). 

Proof of Corollary 1. The proof follows the same structure as the proof of Theorem 2. We outline the argument and highlight the modifications. Consider the oracle setting in which the study-level oracle functions are directly observed. Define the oracle conformity scores 

r⋆i := Φ( f (i)) − Φ( ˜f (i)) , i ∈ I cal ,

and let qΦ,⋆  

> 1−α

and CΦ,⋆ α denote the corresponding oracle quantile and prediction interval. By Assumptions 1– 3, the collection {(Wi, πi, Φ( f (i))) }i∈I cal ∪{ 0} is jointly exchangeable. Therefore, by the split conformal guarantee, 

Pr ¶θ(0) ∈ CΦ,⋆ α

© ≥ 1 − α. (A54) Next, the reverse triangle inequality gives 

|ri − r⋆i | ≤ | ϵ(i)Φ |,

for each i ∈ I cal . Define the event EΦ 

> n

:= {max 1≤i≤m |ϵ(i)Φ | ≤ cn}. By Lemma A9, Pr( EΦ 

> n

) → 1.Conditioning on EΦ 

> n

, the same quantile stability argument as in the proof of Theorem 2 yields 

|qΦ1−α − qΦ,⋆ 

> 1−α

| ≤ cn. Consequently, 

Pr Ä|θ(0) − ˜θ(0) | ≤ qΦ1−α + cn

ä ≥ Pr Äθ(0) ∈ CΦ,⋆ α , EΦ

> n

ä ≥ (1 − α) − Pr  (EΦ 

> n

)c .

Since Pr(( EΦ 

> n

)c) → 0 and cn → 0 by Lemma A9, the same thin-strip argument as in the proof of Theorem 2 yields lim Pr( θ(0) ∈ CΦ 

> α

) ≥ 1 − α.60