Title: Aggregation Alignment for Federated Learning with Mixture-of-Experts under Data Heterogeneity

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.21276v1

Published Time: Tue, 24 Mar 2026 01:41:41 GMT

Number of Pages: 14

Markdown Content:
> 1

# Aggregation Alignment for Federated Learning with Mixture-of-Experts under Data Heterogeneity 

Zihan Fang, Qianru Wang, Haonan An, Zheng Lin, Yiqin Deng, Member, IEEE ,Xianhao Chen, Member, IEEE and Yuguang Fang, Fellow, IEEE 

Abstract —Large language models (LLMs) increasingly adopt Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) architectures to scale model capacity while reducing computation. Fine-tuning these MoE-based LLMs often requires access to distributed and privacy-sensitive data, making centralized fine-tuning impractical. Federated learning (FL) therefore provides a paradigm to collaboratively fine-tune MoE-based LLMs, enabling each client to integrate diverse knowledge without compromising data privacy. However, the in-tegration of MoE-based LLM fine-tuning into FL encounters two critical aggregation challenges due to inherent data heterogeneity across clients: (i) divergent local data distributions drive clients to develop distinct gating preference for localized expert selection, causing direct parameter aggregation to produce a “one-size-fits-none” global gating network, and (ii) same-indexed experts develop disparate semantic roles across clients, leading to expert semantic blurring and the degradation of expert specialization. To address these challenges, we propose FedAlign-MoE, a fed-erated aggregation alignment framework that jointly enforces routing consistency and expert semantic alignment. Specifically, FedAlign-MoE aggregates gating behaviors by aligning routing distributions through consistency weighting and optimizes local gating networks through distribution regularization, maintaining cross-client stability without overriding discriminative local pref-erences. Meanwhile, FedAlign-MoE explicitly quantifies seman-tic consistency among same-indexed experts across clients and selectively aggregates updates from semantically aligned clients, ensuring stable and specialized functional roles for global experts. Extensive experiments demonstrate that FedAlign-MoE outper-forms state-of-the-art benchmarks, achieving faster convergence and superior accuracy in non-IID federated environments. 

Index Terms —Federated learning, mixture of experts, large-scale language model, aggregation. 

The research work described in this paper was conducted in the JC STEM Lab of Smart City funded by The Hong Kong Jockey Club Charities Trust under Contract 2023-0108. This work was also supported in part by the Hong Kong SAR Government under the Global STEM Professorship and Research Talent Hub, and in part by the Hong Kong Innovation and Technology Commission under InnoHK Project CIMDA. The work of Qianru Wang was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant No. 62302367 and Hong Kong Scholar Program. The work of Yiqin Deng was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant No. 62301300. The work of Xianhao Chen was supported in part by HKU-SCF FinTech Academy R&D Funding. Z. Fang, H. An, and Y. Fang are with Hong Kong JC STEM Lab of Smart City and Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon, Hong Kong SAR, China (e-mail: zihanfang3-c@my.cityu.edu.hk; haonanan2-c@my.cityu.edu.hk; my.fang@cityu.edu.hk). Q. Wang is with the School of Computer Science and Technology, Xidian University, Xi’an, China, and Hong Kong JC STEM Lab of Smart City and Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon, Hong Kong, China (email: wangqianru@xidian.edu.cn). Z. Lin and X. Chen are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The University of Hong Kong, Pok Fu Lam, Hong Kong, China (e-mail: linzheng@eee.hku.hk; xchen@eee.hku.hk). Yiqin Deng is with School of Data Science, Lingnan University, Tuen Mun, Hong Kong, China (email: yiqindeng@ln.edu.hk). E1 E3          

> E4
> E3
> E4
> E1 E3
> E5
> E1 E2 E6 E1 E3
> E4 E5 E2 E5 E6 E2 E5 E6 E1 E2 E6 E4
> E1 E3
> E5 E2
> E6 E4 E2 E6

Fig. 1: Federated MoE-based LLM fine-tuning workflow. I. I NTRODUCTION 

Large language models (LLMs) such as GPT [1], LLaMA [2], and DeepSeek [3] have driven remarkable ad-vancements across academia and industry due to their superior ability to model complex linguistic structures and generalize across diverse applications [4]–[8]. Their success is largely attributed to the scaling of model parameters and training data, which enables LLMs to learn rich semantic representa-tions during pre-training and adapt effectively to downstream tasks through fine-tuning [9], [10]. However, continuously scaling dense transformer models leads to rapidly increas-ing training and adaptation costs [11]–[13]. To address this limitation, recent LLM architectures [14]–[17] increasingly adopt the Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) design, which expands model capacity through a large set of specialized experts while activating only a small top-k subset of them for each input [10], [16]–[20]. This sparse activation preserves most of the model’s representational capacity, allowing MoE models to achieve performance comparable to large dense counterparts (e.g., LLaMA-2 7B) with under 40% of their computational cost [16], thereby making MoE a promising foundation for scalable LLM fine-tuning. In many real-world applications, the excessive data required for effective MoE-based LLM fine-tuning raises serious pri-vacy concerns, as sensitive information (e.g., personal clinical data and financial records) cannot be shared across clients under strict privacy regulations or organizational policies, posing a substantial barrier to centralized MoE-based LLM fine-tuning. Federated learning (FL) [21]–[28] has therefore emerged as an alternative which enables collaborative LLM fine-tuning across clients without exposing raw data [29]– [32]. Combined with the sparse activation mechanism of MoE architectures, federated MoE-based LLM fine-tuning offers 

> arXiv:2603.21276v1 [cs.LG] 22 Mar 2026 2

a promising paradigm that simultaneously reduces training overhead while preserving data privacy. In this paradigm, as illustrated in Fig. 1, each client locally activates and fine-tunes a sparse subset of experts selected by the gating network using its private datasets. The updated experts and gating parameters are then aggregated on the server to construct an improved global MoE model, effectively integrating diverse knowledge from multiple clients. While MoE-based LLM fine-tuning holds significant promise in FL environments, it encounters critical aggregation challenges due to inherent data heterogeneity across clients. Client devices always collect local data based on location and user preferences, resulting in significant feature discrep-ancies and data not necessarily independent and identically distributed (non-IID) [33]–[39]. Since MoE models rely on a gating network to dynamically route inputs to specialized ex-perts [12], [37], in federated MoE-based LLM fine-tuning, this heterogeneity drives clients to learn highly divergent gating preference and client-specific expert selections, which substan-tially complicates global model aggregation. First, achieving global gating network that remains aligned with heterogeneous client preference is challenging. Clients train their gating net-works on heterogeneous data distributions, leading to distinct expert selection preferences tailored to local data characteris-tics [18]–[20]. Directly aggregating gating parameters mixes such locally optimized preferences, making the global gating network misaligned with any client’s preference [37], which leads to suboptimal expert selection and degraded local perfor-mance. Second, data heterogeneity poses significant challenges to preserve expert specialization in federated MoE fine-tuning. As experts are updated on client-specific non-IID data, the same-indexed expert is optimized under different conditional feature–label correlations, causing it to learn distinct semantics across clients. Aggregating these semantically inconsistent experts blurs its semantics and undermines specialization, resulting in unstable convergence and degraded performance. We will empirically conduct measurement studies in Sec. II to investigate these challenges. To tackle the above challenges, we propose a federated aggregation alignment framework for MoE-based LLM fine-tuning, named FedAlign-MoE, which enforces routing consis-tency across locally optimized gating behaviors and semantic alignment among same-indexed experts under heterogeneous client data. First, to resolve gating preference misalignment across clients, instead of enforcing parameter-level consensus, we propose a consistency-based gating distribution alignment mechanism that align clients by constructing a global routing distribution and then regularize the local gating networks towards this referenced distribution, preserving each client’s discriminative local preference for expert selection while promoting consistent cross-client gating behaviors. Second, since aligning routing behaviors alone cannot guarantee that experts with the same index maintain consistent semantic roles across clients, we further introduce a semantic-aware expert aggregation strategy that explicitly quantifies the se-mantic consistency of same-indexed experts across clients. Based on a region-conditioned gate aggregation with an adap-tive threshold, FedAlign-MoE selectively aggregates updates from semantically aligned clients while suppressing conflicting ones, thereby guiding experts with the same index to converge toward consistent semantic roles while preserving their spe-cialization across clients. The key contributions of this paper are summarized as follows.  

> •

We propose FedAlign-MoE, a federated MoE-based LLM aggregation framework to align expert and gating network behaviors across clients, enhancing LLM local fine-tuning performance under heterogeneous data distributions.  

> •

We design a consistency-based gating distribution align-ment scheme that aligns routing output distributions based on consistency weighting and constrains local gat-ing networks during fine-tuning, maintaining cross-client consistency without overriding client-specific preference.  

> •

We develop a semantic-aware expert aggregation strategy to adaptively align updates of same-indexed experts from semantically consistent clients, thereby stabilizing expert specialization while promoting global convergence.  

> •

We conduct extensive experiments to evaluate the fine-tuning performance of FedAlign-MoE, demonstrating that FedAlign-MoE outperforms state-of-the-art frameworks in both model accuracy and convergence speed. This paper is organized as follows. Sec. II motivates the design of FedAlign-MoE by revealing the challenges of in-corporating MoE in FL. Sec. III elaborates on the framework design, followed by performance evaluation in Sec. V. Related works and technical limitations are discussed in Sec. VI. Finally, conclusions are presented in Sec. VII. II. C HALLENGES AND MOTIVATION 

In this section, we conduct extensive pilot studies to elabo-rate the key challenges of fine-tuning MoE-based LLM in fed-erated learning, which motivates the design of our FedAlign-MoE. 

A. Gating Preference Misalignment 

In federated MoE systems, each client independently opti-mizes its gating network to determine which experts should be activated based on heterogeneous local data, resulting in client-specific expert routing decision boundaries [40], [41]. How-ever, during global aggregation, existing methods [10], [19], [20], [40]–[43] usually combine these gating networks through parameter averaging across clients, which linearly blends in-compatible routing decisions into a unified but distorted model, thereby entangling diverse expert selection preferences learned across clients. This mixture makes the global gating network tend to misalign with any client’s data characteristics [37]. As a result, inputs that previously activated the most suitable experts on each client may be redirected to less relevant ones after aggregation, thereby degrading local performance and hindering global model convergence. To investigate the impact of aggregating gating parameters on expert selection preferences, we conduct motivating studies using Switch Transformer [17] with 8 experts per layer on the AGNews dataset [44]. We evaluate the performance of client-specific gating network on the same test dataset, where each client independently fine-tunes gating network on local 31 2 3 4 5 6 7 8

> Expert index
> 11 97531
> Layer index

(a) Gating distribution in Client 1 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 

> Expert index
> 11 97531
> Layer index

(b) Gating distribution in Client 2 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 

> Expert index
> 11 97531
> Layer index

(c) Gating distribution in Client 3 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8Expert index 1357911 Layer index Client 1 Client 2 Client 3 (d) Expert selection across clients 

Fig. 2: The expert selection preferences across clients before aggregation under non-IID data distributions. -800 -400 0 400 800 1000 First dimension -1200 -600 0600 1000 Second dimension Client 1 Client 2 Client 3 Global 

(a) Visualization of gating parameters 0.89 0.9 0.91 0.92 Accuracy Client1 Client2 Client3 30% 50% 70% 90%   

> Selected Experts  Same experts Different experts

(b) Expert selection after aggregation 

Fig. 3: The t-SNE visualization of gating parameters and the performance of expert selection from direct parameter aggregation across clients on AGNews dataset. non-IID data. Fig. 2 shows that locally optimized gating networks exhibit distinct client preferences, leading to client-specific expert selections (see Fig. 2d) that closely reflect local data characteristics. In contrast, Fig.3a reveals that directly averaging gating parameters across clients severely disrupts learned routing decisions, yielding a global gating network whose expert selection is misaligned with all clients, thereby resulting in notable performance degradation after aggregation as evidenced in Fig. 3b. These observations underscore the ne-cessity of explicitly aligning gating output distributions, rather than parameters, to preserve client-specific expert selection preferences and thereby improve local performance. 

B. Expert Semantic Divergence 

MoE-based LLM fine-tuning typically leverages a gating network to partition the input space into several regions, with each expert responsible for a specific region [45]. Although effectively mitigating data heterogeneity in centralized MoE through a globally consistent input-space partition, it fails to maintain expert specialization across clients via FL. In federated MoE fine-tuning, each expert is optimized under non-IID conditional data distributions with client-specific char-acteristics [18], [20], where the discrepancy in feature–label correlations within the same input region drives a single expert toward distinct input–output mappings on different clients, causing the same indexed expert to represent different seman-tic regions. Directly aggregating such semantically misaligned expert parameters forces a single expert to serve the union of incompatible regions, which destroys expert specialization and blurs expert semantics, thus resulting in unstable convergence and degraded performance. To empirically demonstrate the expert semantic divergence across clients, we compare the performance of the same indexed expert across clients in locally fine-tuned MoE on the AGNews dataset using Switch Transformer with 8 experts. We train a global MoE and then freeze its gating parameters -60 -30 0 30 60 90 

> First dimension
> -60 -30 030 60
> Second dimension  E1 E2 E3 E4 E5 E6 E7 E8

(a) Representations of experts in the last layer on client 1 -60 -30 0 30 60 90 

> First dimension
> -60 -30 030 60
> Second dimension  E1 E2 E3 E4 E5 E6 E7 E8

(b) Representations of experts in the last layer on client 2 -60 -30 0 30 60 90 

> First dimension
> -60 -30 030 60
> Second dimension  E1 E2 E3 E4 E5 E6 E7 E8

(c) Representations of experts in the last layer on client 3 Client1 Client2 Client3 0.86 0.88 0.9 0.92  

> Accuracy
> Before Aggre After Aggre

(d) Local performance on client-specific data before or after aggregation 

Fig. 4: The t-SNE representation visualization and local per-formance for expert specialization on AGNews dataset. on all clients to eliminate routing discrepancy, while allowing each expert to be updated locally using client-specific non-IID data distributions. It is illustrated in Fig. 4 that the same indexed expert exhibits large inter-client divergences in output embedding distributions on the same test dataset, indicating that it converges to distinct semantic region after local fine-tuning on different clients. Fig. 4d further shows that directly aggregating these semantically misaligned expert parameters leads to inferior local performance, necessitating semantic-aware expert aggregation to detect inter-client se-mantic mismatch and selectively combine expert updates for specialization preservation. III. F RAMEWORK DESIGN 

In this section, we introduce the design of FedAlign-MoE. We will first outline the system overview and workflow, followed by the detailed description of the FedAlign-MoE framework. 

A. Overview 

As shown in Fig. 5, FedAlign-MoE consists of two core components: consistency-based gating distribution alignment and semantic-aware expert aggregation. First, to resolve gat-ing preference misalignment across clients, we introduce a consistency-based gating distribution alignment mechanism that first constructs a global routing reference by aggregat-ing gating distributions (Sec. III-C1) with a routing con-sistency weighting scheme to measure client contributions 4Add & Normalize E2 (Medical Specialist) E3 Gating Network       

> E4 (Logical Specialist)
> Add & Normalize E1 (Physical Specialist) E1 E3 Gating Network
> E4 (Logical Specialist)
> Clients Server
> …
> Consistency-based Gating Distribution Alignment Routing Consistency Weighting Aligned Global Distribution Semantic Metrics Semantic-Aware Expert Aggregation E1 (Medical Specialist)
> E2 (Medical Specialist) E4 (Logical Specialist) E1 (Physical Specialist) Gating Network Aligned Global Reference
> E3
> Sparse Updates
> Expert Updates
> Routing Consistency Weighting
> Global Reference Distribution ( )
> Routing Distributions
> Global Aggregation (with Distributional Constraint)
> Weighted Aggregation Aligned Inconsistent 1) Adaptive Threshold 2) Region-Conditioned Gate
> Stabillized Global Experts Semantic Metrics Sparse Updates Sparse Updates Semantic Metrics
> Aligned G(x) Degraded Experts Misaligned Gating Specialized Semantic Role Preserved
> Global MoE Model g
> p
> G(x) Gating Network G(x)
> Client C Client 1 CLIENTS SERVER
> Local Dataset (Financial) Local Dataset (Medical)

Fig. 5: An overview of FedAlign-MoE framework, where the server aligns routing behaviors across clients via consistency-aware alignment of routing distributions and performs semantic-aware expert aggregation to stabilize the semantics of the same-indexed experts in the global MoE model. (Sec. III-C2), and then optimizes local gating behaviors through distribution regularization with this global reference during fine-tuning (Sec. III-C3), enabling cross-client routing consistency with preserved discriminative local preferences. Second, to mitigate expert semantic divergence, the semantic-aware expert aggregation module selectively aggregates expert updates from semantically consistent clients while suppressing conflicting ones (Sec. III-D1), thereby stabilizing the semantic roles of experts across clients and accelerating global MoE convergence. To further enhance expert specialization, an adaptive threshold is introduced into the aggregation weights to dynamically calibrate alignment sensitivity for different experts (Sec. III-D2). The workflow of FedAlign-MoE follows three steps: i) During local fine-tuning on private, non-IID datasets, each client updates its activated experts and aligns local gating behaviors with a global reference distribution. ii) In the end of a training round, each client computes the routing metrics and semantic similarity for expert-level aggregation. Only the routing output distributions, the activated experts, and their associated statistics are uploaded to the server for aggregation. iii) The server then performs consistency-based gating distri-bution alignment to construct an updated global reference, and applies the semantic-aware expert aggregation for each expert index based on the reported semantic statistics. The global gating distribution and aggregated experts are subsequently distributed to all clients for the next training round. 

B. System Model 

We consider a federated learning system with a central server and C clients collaboratively fine-tuning a global MoE-based LLM under heterogeneous data distributions. Each client 

i ∈ { 1, . . . , N } holds a private local dataset Di drawn from a distinct distribution Pi. The data is non-IID due to the heterogeneous nature of client environments, that is, Pi and 

Pj may not be the same for different client i and j. The collaborative objective is to minimize the global loss function 

L(Θ) = PNi=1  

> |D i||D|

Li(Θ i), where |D| is the total number of samples, and Li(Θ i) = Ex∼P i [ℓ(x; Θ i)] represents the local objective with ℓ(·) being the task-specific loss function and Θi the parameters of local model. In the MoE-based LLM architecture, the backbone model Θi at each client 

i contains L MoE layers that replace the standard dense feed-forward networks. Each MoE layer consists of a gating network and S parallel experts, where the expert set is denoted by E = {1, ..., e, ..., S }. Given an input x, the gating network in each layer computes routing scores Gi(x) over experts, and only the top-k experts ( k ≪ S) with the highest routing scores are selected for fine-tuning, forming the activated expert set 

Ei = Top-k ({Gi(x)}e∈E ). The routing scores of the selected experts are then normalized to the routing probability vector 

pi(x) = [ p(x, 1) , ..., p(x, e ), ..., p(x, S )] as 

pi(x) = Softmax (Gi(x)e∈E i ) . (1) The final output of the MoE layer is computed as the weighted sum of the activated experts’ outputs: 

yi = X

> e∈E i

pi(x, e ) · Ee(x; θei ), (2) where Ei(·) and θei denote the output function and the parameters of expert e, respectively. During local training round t, client c fine-tunes the local MoE-based LLM with sparse activation, updating only the gating parameters θgi and the subset of experts Ei ⊆ E activated by its local data 

Di. After local training, the client uploads the gating output distributions and activated expert weights {θei }e∈E i to the server for aggregation. 

C. Consistency-based Gating Distribution Alignment 

As discussed in Sec. II-A, gating parameter aggregation in existing MoE-based FL studies [10], [19], [20], [40]–[43] without accounting for client-specific expert selection prefer-ences may fail to keep alignment with clients’ data character-istics, which severely degrades local performance under non-IID data distributions. To mitigate this gating misalignment, 5Download Global Distribution      

> Expert Overlap Routing Decision Margin m(e) i1
> o(e)
> 2
> o(e) 3
> o(e)
> Per-expert Aggregation Weight
> Global Reference Routing Distribution
> Download Global Distribution Server Upload Upload Routing Consistency Weighting Gating Distribution Alignment
> Client C
> Distribution Constraint
> (Regularization Loss) Aligns local preference with global consensus Local Gating Network G(x)
> ... Distribution Constraint
> (Regularization Loss) Local Gating Network G(x)
> Client 1
> Local Routing Distribution
> Consistency-based Gating Distribution Alignment

Fig. 6: The gating distribution alignment with routing con-sistency weighting during global aggregation and adaptive distribution regularization during local fine-tuning. we move from parameter-space aggregation to function-space alignment on gating behaviors. Since the output distributions of the local gating network represents selection probabilities of each expert that represents client preferences, aligning these gating distributions encourages clients to agree on consistent expert selection preferences while still allowing distributional variations that reflect discriminative client-specific preference. Therefore, we introduce a consistency-based gating distribu-tion alignment strategy, as illustrated in Fig. 6, which aligns behavioral consensus of gating networks through expert-level routing consistency weighting during aggregation, rather than forcing uniform gating parameters across clients. During local fine-tuning, each client aligns its gating behavior with the global gating distribution to enhance consistency in shared data regions, while retaining flexibility in client-specific regions with low agreement, allowing expert selection to remain sensitive to client-specific data distributions. 

1) Gating Distribution Alignment : Since all clients share an identical gating architecture and select experts from the same expert set, their routing output distributions reside in a common probability space and provide a direct and compara-ble representation of expert selection behavior across clients. These distributions encode client-specific expert selection pref-erences shaped by local data, capturing which experts are suitable for each input and the confidence with which the gating network discriminates among experts. Therefore, under data heterogeneity, discrepancies in routing output distribu-tions explicitly reflect divergences in such preferences across clients. Aligning routing output distributions, rather than ag-gregating parameters, operates on the functional mapping from inputs to expert selection behaviors, ensuring that alignment is performed on routing decisions learned from each client’s data instead of on unconstrained parameter representations, thereby making it a promising target for cross-client gating alignment. Based on this insight, we align clients’ expert selection preferences by enforcing consistency in their routing output distributions rather than directly matching gating parameters. To implement this alignment, the server collects lightweight empirical routing statistics instead of model parameters. Dur-ing each local training round t, client i computes the empirical average routing distribution ¯pi(e) of expert e over its local dataset Di, which is expressed as 

¯pi(e) = 1

|D i|

X

> x∈D i

pi(x, e ), (3) and uploads these per-expert activation distributions to the server. The server then aggregates these routing statistics and the global routing distribution for each expert is pg (e) = 

> 1
> N

PNi=1 ¯pi(e), which reflects global consensus on the routing decision for expert e, serving as a global reference to guide client-side gating behavior optimization. 

2) Routing Consistency Weighting : To derive a global routing distribution pg (e) that remains consistent across het-erogeneous client preferences while preserving their locally learned expert-activation patterns, the key challenge lies in how to appropriately weight client contributions as uniform aggregation may dilute consistent cross-client selections while override locally discriminative preferences. We therefore de-sign a routing consistency weighting scheme for aggregating client-specific routing distributions, which assigns higher ag-gregation weights to clients whose gating behaviors are both externally consistent and internally confident, such that global routing decisions reflect stable expert activations broadly ap-plicable across clients, without suppressing expert selections that are relevant to local data. Specifically, we quantify each client’s routing consistency using two metrics: i) expert over-lap, which measures the external consistency between local routing distribution and global gating behavior to promote stable expert activations; and ii) routing decision margin, which reflects the internal confidence of a client’s routing decisions to better preserve local selection preferences. 

Expert overlap. To establish a representative global routing distribution that captures generalizable behavior, it is essential to prioritize experts exhibiting broad activation across clients. To this end, we introduce an expert overlap metric to measure the consistency between client i’s specific selection preference and the global behavior, providing a reliable indicator of global consensus. By prioritizing globally important experts and shared routing decisions, clients whose routing distributions substantially deviate from the global gating behavior receive reduced weights. This prevents client-specific or incompatible boundaries from dominating global aggregation, thus main-taining consistent routing decisions across clients. Since effective overlap exists only when local client pref-erence and global consensus mutually validate each other, we formulate the expert overlap metric oi(e) for expert e as the multiplicative alignment between the local and global routing distributions: 

oi(e) = ¯ pi(e) · 1

N

> N

X

> i=1

¯pi(e). (4) where ¯pi(e) is the empirical average routing distribution of client i and 1

> N

PNi=1 ¯pi(e) denotes the global routing consen-sus. The expert overlap captures the external consistency of a client’s gating behavior: when a client frequently activates e

(¯pi(e) is large) while the activation probability on other clients remains low ( 1

> N

PNi=1 ¯pi(e) is small), the resulting small over-lap identifies this usage pattern as client-specific rather than 6

globally shared, thereby preventing such localized behaviors from exerting disproportionate influence during aggregation. 

Routing decision margin. While the expert overlap metric 

oi(e) identifies experts that are widely activated across clients, the client-specific patterns captured by certain experts may disproportionately influence the resulting global distribution. Therefore, we utilize routing decision margin to quantify the internal confidence of each client, preserving reliable local decision boundaries while preventing the corruption of the global routing distribution by inconsistent clients. Specifically, clients exhibiting large decision margins (e.g., consistently activate the same expert for similar inputs) contribute more to the global routing distribution, as such behavior reflects a stable and well-formed decision boundary. In contrast, the influence of clients with narrow margins or inconsistent top-

k expert selections is down-weighted to shield the global distribution from unreliable or noisy routing decisions. For each expert e, we define the routing decision margin over client i’s local dataset Di as follows: 

mi(e) = 1

|D i|

X

> x∈D i

max {0, pi(x, e ) − max   

> e′̸=e

pi(x, e ′)}, (5) where pi(x, e ) − max e′̸ =e pi(x, e ′) reflects the decision dom-inance with which it surpasses alternative experts. Large margins indicate that client i maintains a stable and confident decision boundary for expert e, whereas small margins reflect ambiguous or unstable gating behavior. Zero margins corre-spond to experts that are never selected and should therefore exert negligible influence during aggregation. Building on the complementary roles of external consistency 

oi(e) and internal confidence mi(e), we compute a per-expert aggregation weight as 

ωi(e) = si(e)

PNj=1 sj (e) , s i(e) = oi(e) · mi(e), (6) where the multiplicative design enforces a joint-reliability constraint that prioritizes clients whose routing decisions for expert e are both internally stable and externally aligned with the federation, thereby preserving both global consistency and client-specific decision boundaries. With the aggregation weights ωi(e) for each client i, the global routing consistent distribution pg (e) for each expert can be rewritten as 

pg (e) = 

> N

X

> i=1

ωi(e)¯ pi(e), (7) which serves as the global reference for client-side routing distribution alignment, bridging individual decision boundaries with collective knowledge. 

3) Client-Side Optimization with Distribution Regulariza-tion : To bridge the gap between divergent local and global routing stability, probabilistic alignment optimizes expert se-lection directly in the functional space without imposing rigid parameter constraint. Upon obtaining the aggregated global consistent routing distribution pg (e), we introduce a client-side optimization strategy that aligns local gating behaviors with this global reference through distribution regularization. Distinct from ex-isting frameworks [10], [19], [20], [40]–[43] that rely on gating parameter aggregation, this probabilistic alignment optimizes expert selection directly in the functional space. By employing Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence as a soft-constraint regular-ization for local routing distribution, the tolerance for deviation on specialized client preferences is achieved through proba-bilistic similarity of the objective, which allows each local model to preserve its own parameter structure while steering its gating behavior toward the global consensus. Therefore, for each input x, each client aligns its local routing distribution 

pi(x, e ) with global routing target pg (e) by minimizing a regularization loss: 

Lreg = X

> e∈E

αi(e) · DKL (pi(x, e )∥pg (e)) , (8) where DKL (·) denotes the Kullback–Leibler divergence to measure distribution similarity and αi(e) represents the adap-tive weight for each expert, guiding local gating network toward global routing consensus while preserving flexible adaptation to local expert selection preferences. To preserve flexibility in weak-consensus regions while en-forcing consistency on shared experts, we propose an adaptive weight strategy that dynamically adjusts the regularization strength based on expert-level consensus rather than applying uniform alignment constraint across all experts. Experts with high cross-client consistency are strongly aligned to improve cross-client generalization, whereas experts that only activated frequently on specific clients are weakly regularized to pre-serve client-specific selection preferences driven by local data characteristics. Since the proposed expert overlap metric oi(e)

serves as a proxy to quantify this consensus, we define the adaptive weight for expert e on client i as: 

αi(e) = Sigmoid (oi(e) − η), (9) where η represents the overlap threshold reflecting the global consistency of expert e and the sigmoid function Sigmoid (·)

provides a smooth and bounded transition from weak to strong alignment. Globally consistent experts ( oi(e) ≥ η) receive large weights and thus strong alignment, while locally used experts are weakly regularized, allowing deviation from the global gating behavior to preserve specialized preferences. The global routing distribution is typically a smoothed aggregation of heterogeneous client preferences, whereas only Top-k experts are activated for each input. To produce discrim-inative gating network while preserving the sparsity of MoE model, we restrict the distribution regularization to a masked subset of experts that are either selected for current input or globally prominent. Thus, the regularization loss Lreg can be rewritten as 

Lreg = X

> e∈E

αi(e) · DKL (pi(x, e )∥pg (e)) 

· 1[e ∈ Top-k(pi(x, e )) ∪ Top-k(pg (e))] .

(10) Finally, each client jointly optimizes the local MoE training loss Llocal (e.g., task-specific cross-entropy) and the regular-7

ization loss Lreg . The local objective can be expressed as 

Ltotal = Llocal + λLreg , (11) where λ is a balancing coefficient controlling the trade-off between task adaptation and gating consistency. 

D. Semantic-Aware Expert Aggregation 

Recalling Sec. II-B, data heterogeneity often drives iden-tically indexed experts to represent semantically distinct in-put regions and divergent feature–label correlations across clients. Aggregating these experts forces them to handle a union of incompatible regions, thereby compromising expert specialization and model sparsity. While the gating distribution alignment proposed in Sec. III-C enforces consistent cross-client expert selection preferences for similar inputs, it only regulates which expert is activated, rather than how that expert transforms the input. Since expert updates to feature–label mappings remain governed by client-specific data distribu-tions, the semantic consistency on same indexed experts across clients is still not guaranteed. To bridge this gap, we propose a semantic-aware expert aggregation mechanism that quantifies the semantic similarity across clients and selectively aligns expert updates from semantically consistent clients, stabilizing the semantic roles of experts in clients and accelerating global MoE convergence under heterogeneous data distributions. 

1) Region-Conditioned Semantic Aggregation : To pre-serve expert specialization in federated MoE fine-tuning, it is critical to address expert semantic misalignment caused by heterogeneous data distributions. Unlike conventional methods that rely on the expert index for aggregation, we project ex-perts into a functional space, providing a verifiable behavioral identity. Specifically, we characterize each expert’s functional behavior using two semantic indicators derived from its input-space assignments and local weight updates. By explicitly quantifying both the specific input regions an expert serves and the underlying feature–label correlations it has learned, these indicators effectively capture the expert’s specialized role and learned knowledge for semantic alignment. As shown in Fig. 7, these expert semantics are then aligned through a region-conditioned aggregation strategy, which assigns gated aggregation weights to prioritize semantically consistent ex-perts, thereby stabilizing expert semantics and preserving spe-cialization. These semantic indicators are detailed as follows. 

Input-space Assignment. In LLMs, the hidden represen-tation space is highly structured, where spatial proximity in-herently reflects semantic similarity. As each expert receives a subset of hidden states corresponding to the inputs it processes, the average of these hidden states routed to an expert provides a concise representation of the semantic region (e.g., legal terminology or mathematical logic) that the expert specializes in for a given client. Large discrepancies between these representations across clients indicate that identically indexed experts are responsible for disparate semantic regions rather than a shared function. Thus, during the local fine-tuning on client i, we define its input-space assignment μi(e) for expert e

as the average representation of the hidden states h assigned to it by the gating network. Let Hi(e) = {h | argmax G(h) = e}High-Consistency Updates (Aligned) Low-Consistency/Conflicting Updates (Suppressed) Global Expert Aggregation Input-Space Similarity &Direction Consensus                             

> Gated Aggregation Weights Region-Conditioned Semantic Aggregation
> Sigmoid Gate i,j
> D
> Suppressed Updates Global Statistical Analysis Adaptive Gate Function
> Input-Space Assignment Weight Update
> ( ) ie
> μ
> ei
> θ∆
> (( ), ( )) M e e∑
> ( ) ( ) teM e e
> τβ=−∑
> e
> γ∆∑θ.)(,,( ) ()max(0, ( )) t
> i j ei j eSim De
> γστ=−+
> .

Fig. 7: The semantic-aware expert aggregation mechanism, which selectively aggregates experts based on semantic con-sistency, with adaptive thresholding to dynamically calibrate alignment sensitivity. denote the set of hidden states routed to expert e. The input-space assignment is computed as 

μi(e) = 1

|H i(e)|

X

> h∈H i(e)

h. (12) 

Local Weight Update. While the input-space assignment 

μi(e) captures the semantic region that an expert specializes in, it does not fully characterize how the expert transforms those inputs into outputs. Even if two experts focus on similar input regions, differences in learned knowledge during local updates may induce divergent feature–label correlations. To capture this functional behavior, we use the local weight update ∆θ

as a semantic proxy, since it reflects the expert’s optimization direction toward a specific input–output mapping. Consistent update directions across clients indicate a shared objective and functional agreement for same-indexed experts, whereas orthogonal or opposing updates indicate conflicts in learned knowledge. After local fine-tuning, client i computes the local weight update for each expert e as ∆θei = θe,new i − θe,old i , and the direction consensus between client i and j is measured using the cosine similarity function Sim (·):

Di,j (e) = Sim (∆ θei , ∆θej ) = ∆θei · ∆θej

∥∆θei ∥∥ ∆θej ∥ . (13) To identify semantic alignment across clients and mitigate the adverse effects of misaligned experts, we design a region-conditioned gated aggregation mechanism that adaptively in-corporates expert updates based on their semantic consistency. Specifically, cosine similarity between input-space assign-ments acts as a primary filter to ensure that only experts focusing on similar input regions are compared, while the direction consensus measures the semantic alignment of their weight updates to ensure they are learning compatible trans-formations. Based on these two criteria, the server assigns a region-conditioned aggregation weight γi,j (e) to each expert 

e for client pair {i, j }:

γi,j (e) = σ (Sim (μi(e), μ j (e)) − τ ) · max(0 , D i,j (e)) , (14) where τ and σ(·) represent the similarity threshold and the Sig-moid gate function. If the similarity between two experts’ input regions falls below the threshold (Sim (μi(e), μ j (e)) ≤ τ ), 8

the gate closes, minimizing their mutual contribution to the global update. For experts handling similar input regions, their contributions are further scaled by the direction consensus, with highly aligned updates receiving a high aggregation weight, while conflicting gradients are suppressed. Finally, the global update for expert e is computed via the weighted aggregation of local updates in training round t,which is expressed as 

θe(t + 1) = θe(t) + 

> N

X

> i=1

PNj=1 γi,j (e)

PNi=1 

PNj=1 γi,j (e) ∆θei . (15) 

2) Selective Aggregation with Adaptive Threshold : In-dividual experts within an MoE architecture exhibit distinct behavior during fine-tuning [46]–[48], as some experts may rapidly converge to a globally consistent functional role, while others remain highly specialized to local data distributions. These differences in specialization stabilization are further exacerbated by the non-IID data characteristic of federated environments. A static threshold τ in aggregation weight for expert semantic alignment fails to accommodate this diversity, where a large τ may discard valid collaborative knowledge, leading to under-aggregation, whereas a small value incorpo-rates semantically conflicting updates, resulting in semantic blurring and degraded expert specialization. These limitations make it imperative to adapt the region-conditioned aggregation mechanism to the specialization discrepancy for each expert. To enable robust and stable expert selective aggregation, we employ an adaptive thresholding mechanism to dynamically calibrate alignment sensitivity. Since an expert’s specialized role is inherently dictated by the data regions it processes, the statistic of semantic similarities in the input-space assignments measures how closely the local expert e aligns with the collective consensus across clients. Thus, we use the statistical dispersion of expert semantics to calibrate aggregation weight threshold τ . Specifically, during global aggregation, the align-ment sensitivity for expert e is quantified by its mean semantic similarity M (e) and dispersion Σ( e), defined as follows: 

M (e) = 1

N 2

> N

X

> i=1
> N

X

> j=1

Si,j (e),

Σ( e) = 

vuut 1

N 2

> N

X

> i=1
> N

X

> j=1

(Si,j (e) − M (e)) 2,

(16) where Si,j (e) = Sim (μi(e), μ j (e)) denotes the set of pairwise similarities between client i and j for expert e. Here, M (e)

represents the central reference of expert e’s semantic align-ment across all clients, while Σ( e) captures the dispersion of this alignment, reflecting the variance of consensus on the functional role of expert e. A high mean similarity with low dispersion indicates that expert e has reached a stable and widely shared semantic role, whereas a low mean or high dispersion suggests ongoing specialization or semantic disagreement across clients. To adapt the alignment sensitivity to this evolving semantic state, we define an expert-specific adaptive threshold τ te as 

τ te = M (e) − β · Σ( e), (17) where β controls the tolerance to semantic variability. This formulation tightens the threshold when expert semantics are well aligned across clients and relaxes it when expert roles remain diverse, thereby enabling adaptive expert aggregation that enhances specialization without including semantically conflicting updates. With the adaptive threshold τ te for expert e, we refine the gated aggregation weight γi,j (e) as follows: 

γi,j (e) = σ  Si,j (e) − τ te

 · max(0 , D i,j (e)) . (18) By integrating this adaptive thresholding into our region-conditioned aggregation strategy, we ensure that the global MoE model maintains sharp expert specialization and stable convergence, particularly under non-IID data heterogeneity. We summarize the proposed aggregation alignment for fed-erated MoE-based LLM fine-tuning in Algorithm 1. 

Algorithm 1: Federated Aggregation Alignment for MoE-based LLM Fine-tuning  

> 1

Input: Total rounds T , local epochs E, Local Dataset Dc 

> 2

Initialize: Global expert weights {θe(0) }e∈E and global gating distribution p0 

> g

(e). 

> 3

for each round t = 0 to T do  

> 4

// Local Fine-tuning Phase (on Clients)  

> 5

for each client i in parallel do  

> 6

Download global experts θe(t) and global routing reference ptg (e); 

> 7

Calculate adaptive consistency weights αi(e) via Eqn. (9);  

> 8

Fine-tune local MoE-based LLM via 

Ltotal = Llocal + λLreg (Eqn. (11));  

> 9

Compute routing metrics {¯pi(e), o i(e), m i(e)} for gating distribution alignment;  

> 10

Compute input-space assignment μi(e) and local updates ∆θei for expert semantic aggregation;  

> 11

Upload {pi(e), ∆θei , μ i(e), o i(e), m i(e)} to server;  

> 12

end  

> 13

// Global Aggregation Alignment Phase (on Server)  

> 14

for each expert e ∈ E do  

> 15

Calculate routing consistency weight ωi(e) with Eqn. (6);  

> 16

Update global reference: pt+1  

> g

(e); 

> 17

Analyze statistics M (e) and Σ( e) to determine adaptive threshold τ te via Eqn. (17);  

> 18

for each client pair (i, j ) do  

> 19

Compute input-space similarity and direction consensus Di,j (e); 

> 20

Calculate region-conditioned weight γi,j (e)

using Eqn. (14);  

> 21

end  

> 22

Update global expert θe(t + 1) with Eqn. (15);  

> 23

end  

> 24

end  

> 25

Output: Final global model θT

> global

IV. S IMULATION SETUP 

In this section, we present the detailed experimental setup of FedAlign-MoE for heterogeneous MoE-based LLM fine-tuning, which is evaluated against several baselines using care-fully selected hyper-parameters to ensure a fair comparison. 9

Model Method IID distribution non-IID distribution 

AGNews PIQA HellaSwag MMLU AGNews PIQA HellaSwag MMLU Switch-base-16 

FedAvg 0.9263 0.7421 0.7172 0.4641 0.7740 0.6792 0.5206 0.3008 

FedProx 0.9290 0.7473 0.7204 0.4707 0.7872 0.6878 0.5288 0.3176 

PFL-MoE 0.9318 0.7596 0.7314 0.4837 0.7994 0.7008 0.5476 0.3325 

FedMoE 0.9339 0.7681 0.7446 0.4812 0.8137 0.7126 0.5642 0.3506 

FedAlign-MoE 0.9424 0.7822 0.7531 0.5131 0.8522 0.7325 0.5847 0.3979 

DeepSeek-MoE-16B 

FedAvg 0.9206 0.7531 0.7356 0.3960 0.7696 0.6824 0.5105 0.2543 

FedProx 0.9244 0.7602 0.7423 0.4042 0.7816 0.6918 0.5179 0.2589 

PFL-MoE 0.9272 0.7877 0.7508 0.4125 0.7924 0.7136 0.5344 0.2658 

FedMoE 0.9289 0.7928 0.7611 0.4271 0.8112 0.7214 0.5480 0.2805 

FedAlign-MoE 0.9402 0.8115 0.7782 0.4424 0.8518 0.7410 0.5711 0.3338 

Table I: The test accuracy across benchmarks on four datasets with Switch-base-64 and DeepSeek-MoE-16B models under IID and non-IID data distribution ( α = 0 .1). 

1) Models : For our experiments, we employ two repre-sentative MoE-based LLMs, Switch Transformer [17] and DeepSeek-MoE-16B [16]. The Switch Transformer represents a classic scalable MoE design, utilizing a Top-1 routing protocol that directs each token to one of 16 experts per layer. This mechanism allows the model to scale up to 1.6 trillion parameters while maintaining constant computational costs per token. DeepSeek-MoE-16B employs a more sophisticated fine-grained routing strategy (Top-2 out of 64 experts), which has demonstrated performance competitive with dense models like Llama2-7B. 

2) Datasets : To evaluate model performance, we report test accuracy for converged global model on widely used datasets, covering tasks from basic semantic classification to complex knowledge reasoning: (1) AGNews [44]: A multi-class news topic classification dataset containing four categories (World, Sports, Business, and Sci/Tech), commonly used to evaluate text classification capabilities. (2) PIQA [49]: A binary-choice natural language understanding benchmark for commonsense reasoning, where models must choose the more plausible solution to a given goal involving everyday physical interac-tions. (3) HellaSwag [50]: A four-way multiple-choice dataset designed to evaluate a model’s ability to predict the most plausible solution of a given context. It employs adversarial filtering to ensure that models rely on deep reasoning rather than superficial statistical patterns. (4) MMLU [51]: A multi-task benchmark that evaluates general knowledge and reason-ing ability across 57 academic subjects, providing a compre-hensive assessment of a model’s understanding capabilities covering diverse academic and professional domains. 

3) Baselines : To investigate the advantages of our FedAlign-MoE framework, we compare it with the following representative baselines:  

> •

FedAvg [21] is the classical federated optimization method that aggregates local models by directly averaging their parameters across clients.  

> •

FedProx [25] extends FedAvg by introducing a proximal regularization term in the local objective, which con-strains local updates to remain close to the global model and improves training stability under data heterogeneity.  

> •

PFL-MoE [20] adopts a MoE architecture to enable personalized federated learning, where different experts specialize in distinct client distributions, enabling client-specific expert selection from globally shared knowledge.  

> •

FedMoE [19] constructs an optimal sub-MoE for each client while jointly aggregating experts and the gating network across clients, striking the balance between effi-ciency and performance. 

4) Hyper-parameters : In the experiments, we implement FedAlign-MoE framework for MoE-based LLM instruction fine-tuning using Switch-base-16 and DeepSeek-MoE-16B as backbone models. Here, we employ 8-rank QLoRA to enable efficient fine-tuning of the large-scale DeepSeek-MoE-16B model. The distributed system consists of a central server equipped with NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4090 GPUs and C =10 clients operating in synchronized communication rounds. Each client performs local fine-tuning with a learning rate of 

1×10 −4 for one epoch per communication round, and the total number of communication rounds is set to 25. The key hyper-parameters in FedAlign-MoE are set to λ = 0 .1 and η = 0 .1.To simulate realistic data heterogeneity in federated learning, we adopt the commonly used Dirichlet-based data partitioning scheme [20], [34], [45]. Specifically, the client-specific label distributions are sampled from a Dirichlet distribution with concentration parameter α = 0 .1, and the training data are allocated accordingly. This makes each client exposed to a skewed subset of classes, thus creating a challenging non-IID setting for evaluating aggregation alignment. V. P ERFORMANCE EVALUATION 

In this section, we evaluate the effectiveness of FedAlign-MoE against various benchmarks under data heterogeneity. We further investigate the robustness of the proposed framework under varying data distributions and hyper-parameter settings. The contributions of each key components in FedAlign-MoE are also analyzed to illustrate their individual roles in the proposed framework. 

A. The Overall Performance 1) The converged accuracy : Table I presents the test accuracy of FedAlign-MoE and other benchmarks on four datasets under IID and non-IID data distributions. In the IID setting, all federated learning methods achieve comparable 10 FedAvg FedProx PFL-MoE FedMoE FedAlign-MoE 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.9 Local Accuracy Switch-base-16 DeepSeek-MoE-16B 

(a) AGNews FedAvg FedProx PFL-MoE FedMoE FedAlign-MoE 0.1 0.3 0.5 0.7 Local Accuracy Switch-base-16 DeepSeek-MoE-16B (b) PIQA FedAvg FedProx PFL-MoE FedMoE FedAlign-MoE 0.1 0.3 0.5 0.7 Local Accuracy Switch-base-16 DeepSeek-MoE-16B (c) HellaSwag FedAvg FedProx PFL-MoE FedMoE FedAlign-MoE 00.2 0.4 0.6  

> Local Accuracy
> Switch-base-16 DeepSeek-MoE-16B

(d) MMLU 

Fig. 8: The average accuracy for local fine-tuning on four datasets under non-IID data distributions. FedAvg FedProx PFL-MoE FedMoE FedAlign-MoE 0714 21 

> Converged time (epoch)  Switch-base-16 DeepSeek-MoE-16B

(a) AGNews FedAvg FedProx PFL-MoE FedMoE FedAlign-MoE 04812  

> Converged time (epoch)  Switch-base-16 DeepSeek-MoE-16B

(b) MMLU 

Fig. 9: The convergence time across benchmarks on AGNews and MMLU datasets under non-IID data distributions. performance as aligned gating preferences allow experts to learn consistent semantic functions across clients. FedAlign-MoE outperforms other baselines across diverse datasets, indicating that consistency-based gating distribution alignment refines global routing behaviors and enhances expert special-ization even under uniform distributions. In the non-IID set-ting, conventional approaches suffer significant performance degradation due to the failure of direct parameter aggregation on routing preference preservation and expert semantic align-ment. Although FedProx constrains local updates toward the global model via proximal regularization, the neglect of client-specific routing preferences in the aggregated global model still leads to suboptimal expert selection and degraded per-formance. Compared to federated MoE fine-tuning methods, such as FedMoE and PFL-MoE, despite performing expert-level aggregation or weighted combination of local and global models to balance personalization and generalization, the gating preference alignment and expert semantic aggregation are still unexplored. In contrast, by explicitly aligning gating distributions and aggregating semantically aligned expert up-dates, FedAlign-MoE consistently outperforms all baselines in all four datasets, achieving an accuracy improvement of 4% over FedMoE and 7% over FedAvg. To further demonstrate the robustness and stability of FedAlign-MoE, we report the mean and deviation of local fine-tuning accuracy in Fig. 8, highlighting its ability to achieve aligned client-specific rout-ing preference and stabilized expert specification. 

2) The Convergence Performance : Fig. 9 compares the convergence time of FedAlign-MoE and other four bench-marks on AGNews (classification) and MMLU (reasoning) tasks using Switch-base-16 and DeepSeek-MoE-16B models under non-IID data distributions. We observe that FedAlign-MoE consistently achieves fastest convergence, yielding over x1.3 and x1.7 speedups on Switch-base-16 and DeepSeek-MoE-16B models, respectively. This improvement primarily stems from its semantic-aware expert aggregation, which selectively aggregates semantically aligned expert updates, 10 20 30 40 50   

> Number of clients
> 0.68 0.74 0.8 0.86
> Test accuracy
> FedAlign-MoE FedMoE PFL-MoE FedProx FedAvg

(a) AGNews 10 20 30 40 50     

> Number of clients
> 0.28 0.32 0.36 0.4
> Test accuracy  FedAlign-MoE FedMoE PFL-MoE FedProx FedAvg

(b) MMLU 

Fig. 10: The scalability of FedAlign-MoE and other baselines on AGNews and MMLU datasets under Non-IID local data. thereby stabilizing the semantic roles of same-indexed ex-perts across clients and significantly accelerating convergence under heterogeneous data distributions. In contrast, although FedMoE supports client-specific expert selection, it still over-looks the functional alignment of same-indexed experts across clients. As a result, experts with different semantic roles are aggregated together, introducing conflicting optimization directions and resulting in unstable convergence. Compared to FedProx and PFL-MoE, which primarily focus on enhancing local adaptation but fail to enforce semantic consistency of same-indexed experts, FedAlign-MoE explicitly aligns expert semantics across clients, yielding a more stable MoE fine-tuning framework that preserves expert specialization and accelerates global convergence. 

3) Scalability : Fig. 10 demonstrates the scalability of FedAlign-MoE with other baselines on the Switch-base-16 model as the client population increases from 10 to 50 under non-IID data distributions. It can be observed that as the number of clients increases, the test accuracy of all meth-ods exhibits a slight yet stable decrease, as a larger client population introduces more diverse and non-IID distributions that causes same-indexed experts to learn divergent feature-label correlations and exacerbates expert semantic divergence. However, FedAlign-MoE consistently achieves superior per-formance and robust scalability among all benchmarks, under-scoring its adaptability to practical large-scale federated learn-ing deployments. This robustness stems from the dedicated aggregation alignment mechanism in FedAlign-MoE, which explicitly align both routing behaviors and expert semantic roles across clients during global aggregation, rather than relying solely on direct parameter averaging or sparsity-based expert selection, both of which become increasingly vulnerable to routing misalignment and expert semantic divergence as more heterogeneous clients participate. 

B. Micro-benchmarking 1) Robustness to non-IID Data Distribution : Table. II reports the impact of heterogeneous data distributions for 11 

Model Method AGNews MMLU 

α = 0 .1 α = 0 .5 α = 1 .0 α = 0 .1 α = 0 .5 α = 1 .0

Switch-base-16 

FedAvg 0.7740 0.8866 0.8978 0.3008 0.3482 0.4012 

FedProx 0.7872 0.9006 0.9048 0.3176 0.3615 0.4148 

PFL-MoE 0.7994 0.9041 0.9109 0.3325 0.3789 0.4305 

FedMoE 0.8137 0.9103 0.9164 0.3506 0.3921 0.4463 

FedAlign-MoE 0.8522 0.9312 0.9355 0.3979 0.4307 0.4886 

DeepSeek-MoE-16B 

FedAvg 0.7696 0.8810 0.8965 0.2543 0.3060 0.3728 

FedProx 0.7816 0.8963 0.9002 0.2589 0.3178 0.3984 

PFL-MoE 0.7924 0.9017 0.9100 0.2658 0.3275 0.4005 

FedMoE 0.8112 0.9096 0.9122 0.2805 0.3508 0.4146 

FedAlign-MoE 0.8518 0.9281 0.9338 0.3336 0.3953 0.4331 

Table II: The test accuracy on the AGNews and MMLU datasets under non-IID data distributions using Switch-base-16 and DeepSeek-MoE-16B models. 0.0 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.81 0.83 0.85 0.87 

> Test accuracy
> Switch-base-16 DeepSeek-MoE-16B

(a) AGNews 0.0 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.3 0.35 0.4 0.45 Test acuracy Switch-base-16 DeepSeek-MoE-16B (b) MMLU 

Fig. 11: Performance of FedAlign-MoE with varying expert overlap threshold η on AGNews and MMLU datasets. 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.81 0.83 0.85 0.87 Test accuracy Switch-base-16 DeepSeek-MoE-16B 

(a) AGNews 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3 0.34 0.38 0.42 Test accuracy Switch-base-16 DeepSeek-MoE-16B (b) MMLU 

Fig. 12: Performance of FedAlign-MoE with different balanc-ing coefficient λ on AGNews and MMLU datasets. FedAlign-MoE and other baselines on converged test accu-racy using AGNews and MMLU datasets. While all base-line methods exhibit inevitable accuracy degradation as α

decreases from 1.0 to 0.1, FedAlign-MoE consistently pre-serves over 90% and 75% of its full-performance accuracy on Switch-base-16 and DeepSeek-MoE-16B models, demon-strating remarkable robustness to severe data heterogeneity. By aligning gating behaviors with local distribution regular-ization, FedAlign-MoE ensures that expert selection remains adaptive to local data characteristics without compromising global routing consistency. By modeling the functional roles of experts and prioritizing semantically consistent updates, FedAlign-MoE further preserves expert specialization across local data. Conversely, the significant performance drop in baselines such as FedAvg and FedMoE is primarily due to their reliance on index-based expert aggregation, which ignores the fact that local data distributions may cover fundamentally different feature regions in highly non-IID scenarios, causing severe semantic divergence among identically indexed experts. Although FedProx and PFL-MoE enhance local adaptation through regularization or personalization, they fail to account for the misalignment of local gating behaviors, resulting in in-effective expert selection and further limiting their robustness. 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 Average local accuracy a) b) c) FedAlign-MoE 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 

> Test accuracy
> Switch-base-16 DeepSeek-MoE-16B Switch-base-16 DeepSeek-MoE-16B

(a) AGNews 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4     

> Average local accuracy
> a) b) c) FedAlign-MoE 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
> Test accuracy
> Switch-base-64 DeepSeek-MoE-16B Switch-base-64 DeepSeek-MoE-16B

(b) MMLU 

Fig. 13: Consistency-based gating distribution alignment on AGNews and MMLU dataset using Switch-base-16 and DeepSeek-MoE-16B models. 

2) Sensitivity Analysis : Fig. 11 illustrates the impact of varying expert overlap threshold η on test accuracy over the AGNews and MMLU datasets, where η controls the sensitivity of expert alignment during client-side distribution regulariza-tion. When η is too low, most routing decisions are regarded as globally consistent, resulting in strong regularization that forces alignment even on experts that have specialized in local data features and suppresses discriminative local preferences. In contrast, a large η weakens the alignment constraint by assigning small weights to most experts, leading to reduced cross-client consistency and suboptimal accuracy. Moreover, Fig. 12 presents the impact of varying the coefficient λ,which balances task adaptation and gating consistency in the local objective. When λ is close to zero, the regularization loss becomes negligible, causing gating networks to drift independently across clients and leading to severe routing misalignment after aggregation. As λ increases, performance improves as stronger regularization encourages consistent rout-ing behaviors and stabilizes expert selection across clients. However, large λ overly constrains local optimization, pre-venting gating networks from adapting to client-specific data distributions and thus degrading task performance. 

C. Ablation Study 1) Consistency-based Gating Distribution Alignment :

Fig. 13 reports the global test accuracy and the average local accuracy across clients on the Switch-base-16 and DeepSeek-MoE-16B models under non-IID data distributions. We com-pare the FedAlign-MoE framework against three variants: a) standard parameter aggregation, which directly averages gating network parameters across clients; b) gating distribu-tion alignment without routing consistency weighting, which 12 0 5 10 15 20 25                  

> Epoch
> 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.9
> Test accuracy
> FedAlign-MoE Switch-base-16 b) Switch-base-16 c) Switch-base-16 a)
> (a) AGNews 0510 15 20 25 Epoch 00.15 0.3 0.45 Test accuracy FedAlign-MoE Switch-base-16 b) Switch-base-16 c) Switch-base-16 a) (b) MMLU 0510 15 20 25
> Epoch
> 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.9
> Test accuracy
> FedAlign-MoE DeepSeek-MoE-16B b) DeepSeek-MoE-16B c) DeepSeek-MoE-16B a)
> (c) AGNews 0510 15 20 25
> Epoch
> 0.05 0.15 0.25 0.35
> Test accuracy
> FedAlign-MoE DeepSeek-MoE-16B b) DeepSeek-MoE-16B c) DeepSeek-MoE-16B a) (d) MMLU

Fig. 14: Semantic-aware expert aggregation on AGNews and MMLU dataset using Switch-base-16 (Fig. 14(a)-(b)) and DeepSeek-MoE-16B (Fig. 14(c)-(d)). aggregates client routing distributions uniformly; and c) gating distribution alignment without adaptive expert-level weights in client-side optimization. The results show that standard parameter aggregation without routing distribution alignment leads to a substantial performance degradation in both local and global accuracy. Moreover, our consistency-based weight-ing results in a more robust global routing consensus, which improves global consistency while maintaining discriminative local gating preferences, yielding consistent gains in both local and global performance. Adaptive expert-level regularization in client-side optimization further enhances local accuracy as this soft constraint allows local gating networks to flexibly adapt to client-specific data characteristics, achieving stable optimization with strong cross-client generalization. 

2) Semantic-Aware Expert Aggregation : Fig. 14 compares the expert aggregation performance of FedAlign-MoE on the Switch-base-16 and DeepSeek-MoE-16B models under non-IID data distributions. We evaluate the test accuracy of expert aggregation under three variants: a) standard aggregation, which directly aggregates of expert parameters by index; b) region-conditioned aggregation without direction consen-sus, and c) region-conditioned aggregation without adaptive threshold, which utilizes a fixed global threshold. Compared to standard index-based aggregation, FedAlign-MoE achieves consistently higher accuracy and faster convergence on both models, indicating that explicit semantic alignment via region-conditioned gating is crucial for effective expert aggrega-tion. When direction consensus is removed and expert se-mantic quantification only relies on input-space assignment, experts serving similar regions may still learn incompatible feature–label mappings, which introduces inconsistent opti-mization directions and degrades performance. Moreover, the absence of adaptive thresholding undermines the selective filtering mechanism in aggregation, allowing misaligned up-dates to interfere with stable experts, thereby impairing expert specialization and slowing convergence. VI. R ELATED WORK 

MoE-based LLM Framework in Federated Learning: 

By leveraging sparse activation mechanisms, MoE provides a promising paradigm for scaling LLM fine-tuning without sacrificing performance [16], [17], [43], [52], [53], achieving superior performance in enhancing computation and commu-nication efficiency. Despite these advancements, data hetero-geneity across client locations and user preferences introduces significant feature discrepancies for the integration of MoE within FL framework. To address this, current investigations have extended MoE to personalized FL [19], [20], [40]–[43]. For instance, PFL-MoE [20] and pFedMoE [40] alleviate heterogeneity through data-level personalization by combining the global aggregated model with locally fine-tuned MoE mod-els. More expert-centric approaches, such as FedMoE-DA [43] and PM-MoE [41], further identify and select critical experts that are most beneficial for client-specific data distributions, thereby enhancing adaptability to personalized local models on different clients. However, these methods typically treat the MoE layer as a conventional weight collection and focus primarily on parameter-level aggregation by minimizing the distance between local and global weights, often overlooking the divergence in local routing preferences and the specialized expert roles driven by non-IID data, thus resulting in degraded performance due to the misalignment between the global model and local data characteristics. 

Gating Network Alignment during Federated MoE Aggregation: Despite growing interest in integrating MoE models into FL, effectively aggregating local models with het-erogeneous client preferences while preserving global perfor-mance poses significant challenges. Recent frameworks [53]– [56] stabilize gating behavior by employing distillation-based techniques or regularization terms to restrict routing diver-gence across clients. However, these solutions primarily en-force uniformity in expert selection through a unified global gating, which often fails under data heterogeneity, as the highly specialized local data lead to client-specific preferences that deviate significantly from the single global routing. Al-ternatively, several works [20], [43], [45] maintain entirely private gating networks and aggregate only the activated experts to avoid cross-client behavior conflicts. However, without a mechanism to ensure global consistency in expert selection, this total localization leads to expert semantic mis-match where different clients may route identical semantic features to different expert indices, thereby destabilizing the functional specialization of experts during global aggregation and undermining the convergence of global MoE model. 

Expert Semantic Preservation for Federated MoE Fine-tuning: Maintaining expert specialization is essential for MoE performance, leading to the development of the strategies for selective aggregation [10], [19], [57], [58] or cluster-based averaging [43], [59]–[62] to support expert-level aggregation for better global model generalization and specialized knowl-edge preservation. Selective aggregation frameworks like Fed-MoE [19] selectively incorporate expert updates only when they have significant contributions, preventing divergent or low-quality updates from polluting the global experts. How-13 

ever, they typically judge an expert’s contribution within the parameter space rather than from its actual behavior in the functional space, ignoring the underlying semantic regions and the specific feature–label mappings an expert develops during local fine-tuning. Client-level clustering methods, such as FedGroup [59] and FedMoE-DA [43], calculate similarity and group similar clients to improve global convergence. While effective for homogeneous models, this approach suffers from a granularity mismatch in MoE architectures, as a single global client-level cluster cannot capture the divergent expert-level se-mantics that may belong to different functional groups within the same client. Such coarse-grained aggregation merges se-mantically mismatched updates across incompatible experts, eroding the structural advantages of the MoE-based LLMs and resulting in unstable convergence. VII. C ONCLUSION 

In this paper, we have proposed a federated aggregation alignment framework, named FedAlign-MoE, to address the routing preference divergence and expert semantic misalign-ment in MoE-based LLM fine-tuning under heterogeneous data distributions. Our framework introduces two pivotal mechanisms: consistency-based gating distribution alignment and semantic-aware expert aggregation. The consistency-based gating distribution alignment scheme aligns the distribution of gating outputs through consistency weighting, encouraging consistent cross-client gating behaviors while preserving the discriminative local preferences for personalized expert selec-tion. Complementing this, the semantic-aware expert aggre-gation strategy explicitly quantifies the semantic consistency of same-indexed experts across clients. Through a region-conditioned aggregation strategy and an adaptive threshold-ing mechanism, FedAlign-MoE selectively aggregates expert updates from semantically aligned clients while suppressing conflicting ones, thereby ensuring that global experts maintain stable and specialized semantic roles. Extensive experimental results have demonstrated that FedAlign-MoE outperforms state-of-the-art benchmarks in both model accuracy and con-vergence stability. REFERENCES [1] J. Achiam, S. Adler, S. Agarwal, L. Ahmad, I. Akkaya, F. L. Aleman, D. Almeida, J. Altenschmidt, S. Altman, S. Anadkat et al. , “GPT-4 technical report,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774 , Mar. 2023. [2] H. Touvron, T. Lavril, G. Izacard, X. Martinet, M.-A. Lachaux, T. Lacroix, B. Rozi` ere, N. Goyal, E. Hambro, F. Azhar et al. ,“LLaMA: Open and efficient foundation language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971 , Feb. 2023. [3] A. Liu, B. Feng, B. Xue, B. Wang, B. Wu, C. Lu, C. Zhao, C. Deng, C. Zhang, C. Ruan et al. , “Deepseek-v3 technical report,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.19437 , Feb. 2025. [4] T. Duan, Z. Zhang, S. Guo, D. Huang, Y. Zhao, Z. Lin, Z. Fang, D. Luan, H. Cui, and Y. Cui, “Leed: A highly efficient and scalable llm-empowered expert demonstrations framework for multi-agent rein-forcement learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.14680 , 2025. [5] Z. Lin, G. Qu, Q. Chen, X. Chen, Z. Chen, and K. Huang, “Pushing large language models to the 6g edge: Vision, challenges, and opportunities,” 

IEEE Commun. Mag. , vol. 63, no. 9, pp. 52–59, 2025. [6] Z. Fang, Z. Lin, Z. Chen, X. Chen, Y. Gao, and Y. Fang, “Automated federated pipeline for parameter-efficient fine-tuning of large language models,” IEEE Trans. on Mobile Comput. , 2025. [7] T. Duan, Z. Zhang, Z. Lin, S. Guo, X. Guan, G. Wu, Z. Fang, H. Meng, X. Du, J.-Z. Zhou et al. , “Llm-driven stationarity-aware expert demonstrations for multi-agent reinforcement learning in mobile systems,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.19368 , 2025. [8] Z. Fang, Z. Lin, S. Hu, Y. Tao, Y. Deng, X. Chen, and Y. Fang, “Dynamic uncertainty-aware multimodal fusion for outdoor health monitoring,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.09085 , 2025. [9] Z. Lin, Y. Zhang, Z. Chen, Z. Fang, X. Chen, P. Vepakomma, W. Ni, J. Luo, and Y. Gao, “HSplitLoRA: A heterogeneous split parameter-efficient fine-tuning framework for large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.02795 , 2025. [10] Z. Fang, Z. Lin, S. Hu, Y. Ma, Y. Tao, Y. Deng, X. Chen, and Y. Fang, “HFedMoE: Resource-aware heterogeneous federated learning with mixture-of-experts,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.00583 , 2026. [11] R. Yi, L. Guo, S. Wei, A. Zhou, S. Wang, and M. Xu, “EdgeMoE: Empowering sparse large language models on mobile devices,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput. , 2025. [12] Z. Du, S. Li, Y. Wu, X. Jiang, J. Sun, Q. Zheng, Y. Wu, A. Li, H. Li, and Y. Chen, “SIDA-MOE: Sparsity-inspired data-aware serving for efficient and scalable large mixture-of-experts models,” Proc. MLSys , vol. 6, pp. 224–238, Apr. 2024. [13] S. Wang, Z. Chen, B. Li, K. He, M. Zhang, and J. Wang, “Scaling laws across model architectures: A comparative analysis of dense and moe models in large language models,” in Proc. EMNLP , 2024, pp. 5583– 5595. [14] B. Lin, Z. Tang, Y. Ye, J. Huang, J. Zhang, Y. Pang, P. Jin, M. Ning, J. Luo, and L. Yuan, “Moe-llava: Mixture of experts for large vision-language models,” IEEE Trans. Multimed. , 2026. [15] N. Muennighoff, L. Soldaini, D. Groeneveld, K. Lo, J. Morrison, S. Min, W. Shi, P. Walsh, O. Tafjord, N. Lambert et al. , “Olmoe: Open mixture-of-experts language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.02060 , 2024. [16] D. Dai, C. Deng, C. Zhao, R. Xu, H. Gao, D. Chen, J. Li, W. Zeng, X. Yu, Y. Wu et al. , “DeepSeekMoE: Towards ultimate expert spe-cialization in mixture-of-experts language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.06066 , Jan. 2024. [17] W. Fedus, B. Zoph, and N. Shazeer, “Switch Transformers: Scaling to trillion parameter models with simple and efficient sparsity,” JMLR ,vol. 23, no. 120, pp. 1–39, Apr. 2022. [18] X. Lu, Q. Liu, Y. Xu, A. Zhou, S. Huang, B. Zhang, J. Yan, and H. Li, “Not all experts are equal: Efficient expert pruning and skip-ping for mixture-of-experts large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.14800 , May 2024. [19] H. Mei, D. Cai, A. Zhou, S. Wang, and M. Xu, “Fedmoe: Personalized federated learning via heterogeneous mixture of experts,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.11304 , 2024. [20] B. Guo, Y. Mei, D. Xiao, and W. Wu, “PFL-MoE: Personalized federated learning based on mixture of experts,” in Proc. APWeb-WAIM . Springer, Aug. 2021, pp. 480–486. [21] B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A. y. Arcas, “Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized data,” in Proc. AISTATS , vol. 54. PMLR, Apr. 2017, pp. 1273–1282. [22] S. Zongxuan, H. Ru, S. Chuang, W. Shuo, H. Tao, and F. R. Yu, “When communication networks meet federated learning for intelligence interconnecting: A comprehensive survey and future perspective,” China Communications , vol. 22, no. 7, pp. 74–94, 2025. [23] Y. Zhang, Z. Lin, Z. Chen, Z. Fang, X. Chen, W. Zhu, J. Zhao, and Y. Gao, “Satfed: A resource-efficient leo-satellite-assisted heterogeneous federated learning framework,” Engineering , 2025. [24] Z. Lin, G. Zhu, Y. Deng, X. Chen, Y. Gao, K. Huang, and Y. Fang, “Efficient parallel split learning over resource-constrained wireless edge networks,” IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing , vol. 23, no. 10, pp. 9224–9239, 2024. [25] B. Luo, P. Han, P. Sun, X. Ouyang, J. Huang, and N. Ding, “Optimiza-tion design for federated learning in heterogeneous 6g networks,” IEEE Netw. , vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 38–43, Apr. 2023. [26] W. Xiongyue, T. Jianhua, and M. Siew, “Digital twin-assisted semi-federated learning framework for industrial edge intelligence,” China Communications , vol. 21, no. 5, pp. 314–329, 2024. [27] Z. Lin, Z. Chen, Z. Fang, X. Chen, X. Wang, and Y. Gao, “Fedsn: A federated learning framework over heterogeneous leo satellite networks,” 

IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing , vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 1293–1307, 2024. [28] Y. Zhang, H. Chen, Z. Lin, Z. Chen, and J. Zhao, “Lcfed: An efficient clustered federated learning framework for heterogeneous data,” in 

ICASSP 2025-2025 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) , 2025, pp. 1–5. 14 

[29] Z. Lin, X. Hu, Y. Zhang, Z. Chen, Z. Fang, X. Chen, A. Li, P. Vepakomma, and Y. Gao, “Splitlora: A split parameter-efficient fine-tuning framework for large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.00952 , 2024. [30] Z. Lin, G. Qu, W. Wei, X. Chen, and K. K. Leung, “Adaptsfl: Adaptive split federated learning in resource-constrained edge networks,” IEEE Transactions on Networking , 2025. [31] M. Hong, Z. Lin, Z. Lin, L. Li, M. Yang, X. Du, Z. Fang, Z. Kang, D. Luan, and S. Zhu, “Conflict-aware client selection for multi-server federated learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.02458 , 2026. [32] Z. Lin, W. Wei, Z. Chen, C.-T. Lam, X. Chen, Y. Gao, and J. Luo, “Hierarchical split federated learning: Convergence analysis and system optimization,” IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing , 2025. [33] H. Zhu, J. Xu, S. Liu, and Y. Jin, “Federated learning on non-iid data: A survey,” Neurocomputing , vol. 465, pp. 371–390, 2021. [34] Z. Lin, Y. Zhang, Z. Chen, Z. Fang, C. Wu, X. Chen, Y. Gao, and J. Luo, “Leo-split: A semi-supervised split learning framework over leo satellite networks,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput. , 2025. [35] D. Wang, N. Zhang, and M. Tao, “Clustered federated learning with weighted model aggregation for imbalanced data,” China Communica-tions , vol. 19, no. 8, pp. 41–56, 2022. [36] Z. Lin, Y. Zhang, Z. Chen, Z. Fang, Y. Yang, G. Zhang, H. Yang, C. Wu, X. Chen, and Y. Gao, “Esl-leo: An efficient split learning framework over leo satellite networks,” in International Conference on Wireless Artificial Intelligent Computing Systems and Applications , 2025, pp. 344–357. [37] L. Xie, T. Luan, W. Cai, G. Yan, Z. Chen, N. Xi, Y. Fang, Q. Shen, Z. Wu, and J. Yuan, “dFLMoE: Decentralized federated learning via mixture of experts for medical data analysis,” in Proc. CVPR , 2025, pp. 10 203–10 213. [38] M. Hu, J. Zhang, X. Wang, S. Liu, and Z. Lin, “Accelerating federated learning with model segmentation for edge networks,” IEEE Transac-tions on Green Communications and Networking , vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 242– 254, 2024. [39] Z. Lin, Z. Chen, X. Chen, W. Ni, and Y. Gao, “Hasfl: Heterogeneity-aware split federated learning over edge computing systems,” IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing , 2026. [40] L. Yi, H. Yu, G. Wang, X. Liu, and Q. Hu, “pFedMoE: Data-level personalization with mixture of experts in model-heterogeneous person-alized federated learning,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. , 2026. [41] Y. Feng, Y.-a. Geng, Y. Zhu, Z. Han, X. Yu, K. Xue, H. Luo, M. Sun, G. Zhang, and M. Song, “PM-MOE: Mixture of experts on private model parameters for personalized federated learning,” in Proc. WWW , Apr. 2025, pp. 134–146. [42] E. L. Zec, O. Mogren, J. Martinsson, L. R. S¨ utfeld, and D. Gillblad, “Specialized federated learning using a mixture of experts,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.02056 , 2020. [43] Z. Zhan, W. Zhao, Y. Li, W. Liu, X. Zhang, C. W. Tan, C. Wu, D. Guo, and X. Chen, “FedMoE-DA: Federated mixture of experts via domain aware fine-grained aggregation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.02115 , Dec. 2024. [44] X. Zhang, J. Zhao, and Y. LeCun, “Character-level convolutional net-works for text classification,” Proc. NeurIPS , vol. 28, Dec. 2015. [45] G. Hu, Y. Teng, P. Wu, and N. Wang, “Fft-moe: Efficient federated fine-tuning for foundation models via large-scale sparse moe under heterogeneous edge,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.18663 , 2025. [46] J. Liu, J. Liu, H. Xu, Y. Liao, Z. Wang, and Q. Ma, “Yoga: Adaptive layer-wise model aggregation for decentralized federated learning,” 

IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw. , vol. 32, no. 2, pp. 1768–1780, 2023. [47] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, “Imagenet classification with deep convolutional neural networks,” Proc. NeurIPS , vol. 25, 2012. [48] M. Raghu, J. Gilmer, J. Yosinski, and J. Sohl-Dickstein, “Svcca: Singular vector canonical correlation analysis for deep learning dynamics and interpretability,” Proc. NeurIPS , vol. 30, 2017. [49] Y. Bisk, R. Zellers, J. Gao, Y. Choi et al. , “Piqa: Reasoning about physical commonsense in natural language,” in Proc. AAAI , vol. 34, no. 05, Feb. 2020, pp. 7432–7439. [50] R. Zellers, A. Holtzman, Y. Bisk, A. Farhadi, and Y. Choi, “Hellaswag: Can a machine really finish your sentence?” in Proc. ACL , 2019, pp. 4791–4800. [51] D. Hendrycks, C. Burns, S. Basart, A. Zou, M. Mazeika, D. Song, and J. Steinhardt, “Measuring massive multitask language understandin,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.03300 , Jan. 2021. [52] B. Guo, C. Zhou, S. He, J. Chen, and X. Shen, “Mixture-of-experts as continual knowledge adapter for mobile vision understanding,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput. , 2025. [53] Y. Xiao, Y. Lu, F. Tang, R. Wang, and G. Wang, “A federated rec-ommendation system framework based on variational autoencoder with mixture of experts,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput. , 2025. [54] T. Li, A. K. Sahu, M. Zaheer, M. Sanjabi, A. Talwalkar, and V. Smith, “Federated optimization in heterogeneous networks,” Proc. MLSys ,vol. 2, pp. 429–450, 2020. [55] S. P. Karimireddy, S. Kale, M. Mohri, S. Reddi, S. Stich, and A. T. Suresh, “Scaffold: Stochastic controlled averaging for federated learn-ing,” in Proc. ICML , vol. 119. PMLR, Jul. 2020, pp. 5132–5143. [56] J. Zhang, Y. Hua, H. Wang, T. Song, Z. Xue, R. Ma, and H. Guan, “Fedcp: Separating feature information for personalized federated learn-ing via conditional policy,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD , 2023, pp. 3249– 3261. [57] C. Miao, T. Chang, M. Wu, H. Xu, C. Li, M. Li, and X. Wang, “Fedvla: Federated vision-language-action learning with dual gating mixture-of-experts for robotic manipulation,” in Proc. ICCV , 2025, pp. 6904–6913. [58] A. Radwan, M. Soliman, O. Abdelaziz, and M. Shehata, “FedDG-MoE: Test-time mixture-of-experts fusion for federated domain generaliza-tion,” in Proc. CVPR , 2025, pp. 1811–1820. [59] M. Duan, D. Liu, X. Ji, R. Liu, L. Liang, X. Chen, and Y. Tan, “Fedgroup: Efficient federated learning via decomposed similarity-based clustering,” in 2021 IEEE Intl Conf on Parallel & Distributed Processing with Applications, Big Data & Cloud Computing, Sustain-able Computing & Communications, Social Computing & Networking (ISPA/BDCloud/SocialCom/SustainCom) . IEEE, 2021, pp. 228–237. [60] M. Isaksson, E. L. Zec, R. C¨ oster, D. Gillblad, and ˇ S. Girdzijauskas, “Adaptive expert models for personalization in federated learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.07832 , 2022. [61] J. Sievers, T. Blank, and F. Simon, “Advancing accuracy in energy forecasting using mixture-of-experts and federated learning,” in ACM e-Energy , 2024, pp. 65–83. [62] F. Sattler, K.-R. M¨ uller, and W. Samek, “Clustered federated learning: Model-agnostic distributed multitask optimization under privacy con-straints,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst. , vol. 32, no. 8, pp. 3710–3722, 2020.