Title: Privacy-Enhancing Encryption in Data Sharing: A Survey on Security, Performance and Functionality

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.26224v1

Published Time: Mon, 30 Mar 2026 01:04:01 GMT

Number of Pages: 36

Markdown Content:
# Privacy-Enhancing Encryption in Data Sharing: A Survey on Security, Performance and Functionality 

YONGYANG LV, Tianjin University, China 

XIAOHONG LI, Tianjin University, China 

RUITAO FENG ∗, Southern Cross University, Australia 

XINYU LI, Zhongguancun Laboratory, China 

GUANGDONG BAI ∗, City University of Hong Kong, China 

LEO ZHANG, Griffith University, Australia 

LILI QUAN, Singapore Management University, Singapore 

WILLY SUSILO, University of Wollongong, Australia The vigorous development of the Internet has spurred exponential data growth, yet data is predominantly stored in isolated user entities, hampering its full value realization. In large-scale deployment of “AI+industries” such as smart medical care, intelligent transportation and smart homes, the gap between data supply and demand continues to widen, and establishing an effective data sharing mechanism is the core of promoting high-quality industrial development. However, data sharing faces significant challenges in security, performance, and functional adaptability. Privacy-enhancing encryption technologies, including Attribute-Based Encryption (ABE), Proxy Re-encryption (PRE), and Searchable Encryption (SE), offer promising solutions with distinct advantages in enhancing security, improving flexibility, and enabling efficient sharing. Statistical analysis of relevant literature from 2020 to 2025 reveals a rising research trend in ABE, PRE and SE, focusing on their data sharing applications. Firstly, this work proposes a data sharing process framework and identifies 20 potential attacks across its stages. Secondly, this work integrates ABE, SE, PRE with 12 enhancement technologies and examines their multi-dimensional impacts on the security, performance, and functional adaptability of data sharing schemes. Lastly, this work outlines key application scenarios, challenges, and future research directions, providing valuable insights for advancing data sharing mechanisms based on privacy-enhancing encryption technologies. CCS Concepts: • Do Not Use This Code → Generate the Correct Terms for Your Paper .Additional Key Words and Phrases: Privacy-enhancing encryption, data sharing, security, performance, function 

ACM Reference Format: 

Yongyang Lv, Xiaohong Li, Ruitao Feng, Xinyu Li, Guangdong Bai, Leo Zhang, Lili Quan, and Willy Susilo. 2018. Privacy-Enhancing Encryption in Data Sharing: A Survey on Security, Performance and Functionality. J. ACM 37, 4, Article 111 (August 2018), 36 pages. https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX 

1 Introduction 

In the contemporary era marked by the vigorous evolution of the Internet, data volumes are expanding at an exponential rate. A wide range of fields and scenarios, including the training of large-scale models, the advancement of scientific experiments, and the precise forecasting of market trends, are heavily reliant on substantial data resources [ 117 , 133 ]. Data, as a crucial factor 

> ∗

Corresponding author. This work was supported by National Key Research and Development Program of China (2023YFB3107100). Authors’ Contact Information: Yongyang Lv, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China, lvyongyang@tju.edu.cn; Xiaohong Li, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China, xiaohongli@tju.edu.cn; Ruitao Feng, Southern Cross University, Gold Coast, Australia, ruitao. feng@scu.edu.au; Xinyu Li, Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing, China, xinyuli1920@gmail.com; Guangdong Bai, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China, guangbai@cityu.edu.hk; Leo Zhang, Griffith University, Queensland, Australia, leo.zhang@griffith.edu.au; Lili Quan, Singapore Management University, Singapore, Singapore, liliquan@smu.edu.sg; Willy Susilo, University of Wollongong, New South Wales, Australia, willy_susilo@uow.edu.au. J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018.  

> arXiv:2603.26224v1 [cs.CR] 27 Mar 2026 111:2 Yongyang Lv, Xiaohong Li, Ruitao Feng, Xinyu Li, Guangdong Bai, Leo Zhang, Lili Quan, and Willy Susilo

of production, has been recognized as a key strategic asset by numerous countries worldwide [ 26 , 99 , 103 ]. However, massive volumes of data remain siloed in private storage environments, which significantly impedes the full realization of data’s potential value [ 49 ]. Only by establishing an effective data sharing mechanism to break down data silos can we unleash the latent value of data and drive innovation and development across various industries [111]. Currently, the data sharing field is confronted with multiple complex challenges, which have significantly undermined data owners’ willingness to engage in data sharing [112]. Among these, the balance between security [ 61 , 124 ], performance [ 127 , 174 ], and functionality [ 33 ] in the data sharing process is particularly prominent. Traditional encryption technology, while effective in ensuring data sharing security, has increasingly shown certain limitations as data sharing security requirements grow more complex [ 39 ]. For instance, in multi-user scenarios where multiple data users require access to the same data, traditional encryption methods often depend on inefficient one-to-one encryption schemes or risk private key disclosure. In this context, privacy-enhancing encryption technologies [ 12 , 39 ] have emerged as an innovative solution, effectively addressing many challenges in data sharing. This technology enables specific computation on encrypted data. Users, by decrypting the data with their designated keys, can access solely the output of the specific function, thereby ensuring that other irrelevant information remains inaccessible [51]. Privacy-enhancing encryption technologies can address the data sharing dilemma from multiple dimensions: At the security level, Attribute-Based Encryption (ABE) [ 56 , 142 ] and Identity-Based Encryption (IBE) [ 84 , 122 ] enable authorization-based decryption according to user attributes or identities-ciphertext can only be decrypted when specific conditions are met, thereby accurately enhancing data sharing security. At the flexibility level, Searchable Encryption (SE) [ 54 , 130 , 150 ,164 ] supports the retrieval of shared data in cloud environments or distributed systems via keyword indexing, while Proxy Re-encryption (PRE) [ 24 , 44 , 133 ] allows ciphertext re-encryption before transmission. This eliminates the cumbersome steps of downloading, decrypting, and retransmitting data in traditional sharing processes, facilitating cross-security-domain data flow. At the efficiency level, Broadcast Encryption (BE) [ 77 , 133 ] can achieve multi-user sharing through open channels and improve sharing efficiency, which is crucial for scenarios such as large-scale model training. It should be noted that improvements in security and functionality often come at the cost of partial performance, and balancing these three aspects remains a core scientific issue that urgently needs to be resolved. Current research primarily focuses on one or two key dimensions among them. With the in-depth penetration of Artificial Intelligence (AI) technology, the risk of privacy leakage in intelligent scenarios is on the rise, and the tension between privacy protection and intelligent experience has become increasingly pronounced [ 78 ]. In smart homes, the risk of exposure of sensitive information, such as sleep monitoring data and household images, is extremely high [ 8, 9 ]. In the field of intelligent transportation, the leakage of users’ travel trajectories may lead to security problems such as tracking [ 5 , 148 ]. Notably, the personalized service capability of intelligent agents essentially hinges on user data collection and model training. For example, the collaboration of cross-room sensor data to achieve intelligent temperature control, and the in-depth mining of user travel data, form the basis for optimizing route planning. However, it is difficult to strike a balance between privacy and intelligent experience solely through data isolation or desensitization. Therefore, the collaboration between privacy-protecting encryption algorithms and enhancement technologies (Federated Learning (FL), Secure Multi-Party Computation (MPC), and other relevant technologies are involved, for details, refer to Sec.2.2) serves as the core solution to this contradiction. Firstly, encryption algorithms block privacy leakage channels at the source. Secondly, enhancement technologies support the joint modeling of multi-source data, thereby improving service accuracy while safeguarding privacy. Together, these two types of technologies  

> J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018. Privacy-Enhancing Encryption in Data Sharing: A Survey on Security, Performance and Functionality 111:3
> Fig. 1. Research trends on privacy-enhancing encryption technologies and data sharing

can balance privacy protection and data value release, providing core technical support for the sustainable development of scenarios such as smart homes and intelligent transportation. While prior surveys have extensively examined data sharing challenges in domains such as health-care [ 6, 49 , 88 ], agriculture [ 120 ], social networks [ 101 ], and e-governance [ 38 , 111 ], they remain anchored in traditional security paradigms. The landscape shifted in 2020 when Keller introduced the seminal framework “a versatile framework for MPC” [ 60 ], heralding the large-scale deployment of privacy-preserving computation secure MPC. Subsequent research has grown exponentially, transforming the mantra of “data available but invisible” from aspiration to operational reality [82 ]. Existing reviews, however, are constrained by their preoccupation with static data security, overlooking the paradigm shift catalyzed by emerging privacy-enhancing technologies [ 61 , 120 ]. Song et al. [ 117 ] systematically survey 109 blockchain-based data sharing articles (2012-2021) and dissect their architectures, interoperability, and security mechanisms. Gupta et al. [ 46 ] present a taxonomy of data-protection techniques spanning 49 articles (2010-2020), whereas Upadrista et al. [ 124 ] synthesize 48 articles (2013-2022) on blockchain adoption in remote-health-monitoring scenarios, emphasizing data security and privacy. In contrast, this survey achieves threefold ad-vances. First, it consolidates 116 core articles and incorporates an additional 48 top-tier conference and journal papers, published between 2023 and 2025, yielding the most comprehensive literature map to date. Second, it systematically catalogues emerging attacks across the entire data sharing life cycle. Third, it introduces a quantifiable security-performance-functionality evaluation matrix, enabling granular comparison of each proposed scheme. From 2020 to 2025, this work conducted a statistical analysis of literature related to privacy-enhancing encryption technologies and data sharing based on privacy-enhancing encryption. The analysis covered journal papers, conference papers, patents, and dissertations. The results are presented in Fig.1, respectively. Comprehensive analysis reveals that research based on ABE, SE and PRE exhibits a continuous growth trend. In contrast, research on BE and IBE fluctuates but maintains a relatively stable overall number. Given this, this work will center on applying ABE, SE, and PRE to data sharing. We’ll systematically analyze 116 related papers and delve into their multi-dimensional impacts on security, performance, and functional adaptability. SE and IBE are incorporated into the enhancement technology. The contributions of this work are as follows: 1) Three privacy-enhancing encryption technologies, ABE, SE and PRE, are systematically summarized and classified. 12 practical enhancement technologies in the data sharing scheme are summarized.  

> J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018. 111:4 Yongyang Lv, Xiaohong Li, Ruitao Feng, Xinyu Li, Guangdong Bai, Leo Zhang, Lili Quan, and Willy Susilo

2) Through a meticulous review of the entire data sharing process, 20 potential attacks across different data sharing stages are deeply analyzed. This analysis offers precise targets for enhancing data sharing security. 3) The crucial roles of combining privacy-enhancing encryption with enhancement technologies in bolstering data sharing security, optimizing performance, and broadening functional applications are comprehensively compared and analyzed. Additionally, the paper explores how existing research balances security, functionality, and performance in data sharing. 4) The paper systematically outlines optimal solutions for privacy-enhancing encryption based data sharing across various scenarios. It also sums up and examines key challenges in current research, proposing future research directions in this field based on this analysis. The structure of this work is as follows: Sec.2 presents an in-depth overview of the principles and classification of ABE, SE, and PRE, while providing a detailed introduction to the practical enhancement technologies in data sharing schemes. Sec.3 proposes a general data sharing process and analyzes the security threats faced by each stage. Sec.4, 5, 6 respectively summarize the research progress of ABE, SE, and PRE in improving data sharing security, performance, and functionality. Sec.7 discusses application scenarios of data sharing based on privacy-enhancing encryption technologies. Sec.8 delves into this research, summarizes challenges, and looks forward to future research directions. Sec.9 concludes the paper. 

2 Background 

This section provides a systematic overview of the principles and research status of ABE, SE, and PRE. It also summarizes the enhancement technologies that may be relevant to data sharing schemes. 

2.1 Principles and Research Status of ABE, SE and PRE 

This section expounds the basic contents and classification of ABE, SE and PRE. ABE implements access authorization management based on attributes through fine-grained permission control strategy, while SE focuses on efficient keyword retrieval under the condition of steganography, taking into account privacy protection and data availability. PRE, on the other hand, takes security permission conversion as the core to realize the controllable migration of encrypted data between different cryptographic systems. Table 1 summarizes the main characteristics of ABE, SE and PRE. 

Table 1. Main characteristics of ABE, SE and PRE          

> Technology Application Characteristics Superiority Limitations
> ABE Frequent retrieval of encrypted data content is required. Efficient query in en-crypted environment. Only keyword search is supported, not complex analysis. SE Need to entrust a third party to forward or share encrypted data. Cross-domain data secu-rity flow. Relying on trusted agents may introduce a single point of risk. PRE Need dynamic and fine-grained permission control. Role/Attribute-Driven Access Control. The calculation overhead is high, and policy management is complicated.

2.1.1 Attribute-Based Encryption. ABE is a fine-grained data access control encryption technology that links user attributes to access policies. Fig. 2 (a) illustrates the ABE technical framework. The detailed process is as follows: 1) Key Generation: Key Generation Center (KGC) generates keys for encryption and decryption, and sends them to Data Owner (DO) and Data User (DU). 2) Encrypt Data Using Access Policies: The DO encrypts the data with the key and access policy received from KGC to ensure that only users who meet the access policy can decrypt the data. 3)  

> J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018. Privacy-Enhancing Encryption in Data Sharing: A Survey on Security, Performance and Functionality 111:5
> Fig. 2. Technical framework of ABE, SE and PRE

Attribute Verification: Cloud Server Provider (CSP) receives the encrypted data and access policy from DO, and verifies whether the attributes of DU conform to the access policy. 4) Decipher Text: DU decrypts the encrypted data received from CSP with the key received from KGC to obtain the original unencrypted data. Based on where the policy is bound, it can be categorized into Ciphertext-Policy Attribute-Based Encryption (CP-ABE) [ 13 , 22 , 72 , 89 ] and Key-Policy Attribute-Based Encryption (KP-ABE) [ 172 ]. CP-ABE embeds the access policy in the ciphertext and associates the user key with the attribute set. Data owners can define dynamic access rules, and only users meeting these policies can decrypt the data. This approach supports one-to-many sharing and suits scenarios where DO actively control access rights. KP-ABE, by contrast, embeds the access policy in the user key and links the ciphertext to the attribute set, making it fit for situations where the receiver passively matches the policy, such as in paid content distribution. In terms of dynamic support, ABE can be divided into static attribute encryption [ 154 ] and Dynamic Attribute-Based Encryption (DABE) [ 13 , 142 ]. In static attribute encryption, user attributes can’t be altered after key generation, so it’s suitable for scenarios with stable attributes. DABE, however, allows real-time attribute and policy updates. But it faces the key revocation problem. Regarding privacy protection, ABE can be classified into hidden-policy attribute encryption [ 13 , 153 ] and anonymous attribute encryption [ 167 ]. Hidden-policy attribute encryption conceals the access policy during encryption, such as anonymous access trees, to prevent servers or third parties from getting sensitive rule information. This makes it ideal for commercial bidding or sensitive policy protection. In anonymous attribute encryption, the user’s key and attributes are anonymized to prevent user identity inference from the key. 

2.1.2 Searchable Encryption. SE is a cryptographic technology that facilitates keyword searches on encrypted data. Fig. 2 (b) illustrates the SE technical framework. The detailed process is as follows: 1) Key Generation: KGC generates keys for encryption and decryption, and sends them to DO and DU. 2) Data Encryption: DO encrypts the data with the key received from KGC, and sends the data ciphertext to CSP for storage. 3) Trapdoor Generation: DU generates a trap door, which is a key for searching encrypted data. DU sends this trap to CSP. 4) Match and Search: CSP receives the trap door from DU and uses this trap door to search in the encrypted data to find the matched encrypted data item. CSP sends the search results back to DU. 5) Decipher Text: DU decrypts the search result received from CSP using the key received from KGC to obtain the original data. Based on the cryptosystem classification, it can be categorized into Symmetric Searchable Encryption (SSE) [ 42 ] and Asymmetric Searchable Encryption (ASE) [ 90 ]. In SSE, encryption, decryption, and trapdoor generation all utilize the same symmetric key. It relies on technologies such as pseudo-random functions and hash algorithms to construct indexes and search protocols. SSE boasts high computational efficiency and a simple algorithm structure, making it suitable for  

> J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018. 111:6 Yongyang Lv, Xiaohong Li, Ruitao Feng, Xinyu Li, Guangdong Bai, Leo Zhang, Lili Quan, and Willy Susilo

single-user models. However, its flexibility is somewhat limited, and it typically only supports single-keyword or simple logical searches. ASE, on the other hand, is based on public-key cryptography, such as bilinear pairings and elliptic curves. DO encrypts the data using the public key, while the user generates the search trapdoor with the private key. This makes ASE suitable for multi-user sharing scenarios like email systems, as it eliminates the need for key negotiation. Nevertheless, it comes with a higher computational cost and is better suited for complex search logics, such as multi-keyword combinations. According to keyword processing capabilities, SE can be divided into single-keyword search [ 115 ] and multi-keyword search [ 116 , 163 ]. Single-keyword search only supports one keyword at a time. It is relatively simple to implement but has lower accuracy. Multi-keyword search, however, supports queries with multiple keyword combinations, such as “AND”/“OR” logic. This requires addressing challenges related to computational complexity and privacy leakage. From a dynamic perspective, SE can be classified as Static Searchable Encryption [ 40 , 114 ] and Dynamic Searchable Encryption (DSE) [ 43 , 146 ]. Static Searchable Encryption cannot be modified once the data is uploaded, making it suitable for archiving scenarios. DSE, in contrast, supports data addition, deletion, and modification. It needs to address issues like forward privacy and backward privacy. 

2.1.3 Proxy Re-encryption. PRE is an encryption technology that allows a third-party Proxy to transform encrypted data from one user’s key system to another without decrypting the ciphertext. This technology elegantly solves the key management problem in encrypted data sharing Fig. 2 (c) illustrates the PRE technical framework. The detailed process is as follows: 1) Key Generation: KGC is responsible for generating initial encryption keys and sending them DO and DU. 2) Data Encryption: DO encrypts the data with the key received from KGC to ensure the security of the data during storage or transmission. 3) Re-encryption Key Generation: DO generates a re-encryption key, which is used to convert the data from DO’s encryption domain to DU’s encryption domain. DO sends this re-encryption key to CSP. 4) Re-encryption: CSP uses the re-encryption key received from DO to re-encrypt the encrypted data stored in the cloud, so that it can be converted to the encryption domain of DU without decryption. 5) Decrypt Ciphertext: DU decrypts the re-encrypted data received from CSP using the key received from KGC, thus obtaining the original data. Based on the number of conversion times, PRE can be categorized into single-hop PRE [ 113 ,138 , 157 ] and multi-hop PRE [ 83 , 108 , 151 , 157 ]. Single-hop PRE permits the proxy to convert the ciphertext only once, and the converted ciphertext cannot be further processed by other proxies. This type of PRE is well-suited for single authorization scenarios. It offers high security but has limited flexibility. Multi-hop PRE, on the other hand, supports multiple conversions of the ciphertext by the proxy. After each transformation, the ciphertext can still be further processed by other proxies. This type of PRE also has high security and is suitable for single authorization scenarios. According to the direction of authorization, PRE can be divided into unidirectional PRE [ 113 , 151 ]and bidirectional PRE [ 135 ]. Unidirectional PRE only allows one-way conversion from the licensor to the licensee. The reverse operation is not feasible. This type of scheme is common in cloud data sharing. Bidirectional PRE supports two-way authority conversion. In other words, user A and user B can authorize decryption authority to each other. It is suitable for peer-to-peer cooperation scenarios, but requires a higher-level security verification mechanism. Based on the fundamental classification of cryptography, PRE can be divided into bilinear pair-based PRE [ 133 ] and lattice-based PRE [ 67 ]. Bilinear pair-based PRE leverages bilinear pairings on elliptic curves to achieve ciphertext conversion. This type of PRE has the advantage of high computational efficiency, but it depends on specific mathematical assumptions. Lattice-based PRE is based on quantum-resistant lattice cryptography. It is suitable for post-quantum security scenarios.  

> J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018. Privacy-Enhancing Encryption in Data Sharing: A Survey on Security, Performance and Functionality 111:7

2.2 Principle and Characteristics of Enhancement Technology 

In data sharing scenarios, while encryption technology ensures basic data confidentiality, practical applications still encounter multi-dimensional challenges. This section introduces 12 practical enhancement technologies in data sharing schemes. 1) Cloud Computing (CC): CC [ 41 , 59 , 172 ] provides computing resources distributed on demand through the network. Users can flexibly acquire and release resources and pay according to usage without managing the underlying hardware. 2) Blockchain (BC): BC [ 40 , 85 , 152 ] is a multi-party maintained distributed ledger technology that leverages cryptography for data transmission and access security, enabling tamper-resistant, non-repudiable, and consistent data storage. 3) Interplanetary File System (IPFS): IPFS [ 45 , 169 ] is a P2P distributed file storage and sharing protocol. Through content addressing and distributed storage, it aims to create a more efficient, secure, and lasting Internet file storage and transmission system, with the goal of supplementing or even replacing HTTP and improving data availability and security. 4) Zero-Knowledge Proof (ZKP): ZKP [ 48 ] is a cryptographic protocol. The prover can prove the truth of a statement to the verifier without revealing any additional information. The verifier can only confirm whether the statement is true or not. 5) Homomorphic Encryption (HE): HE [113] is an encryption technology, which allows direct calculation on encrypted data without decryption first. The decrypted calculation results are the same as those directly calculated in plain text, ensuring data privacy. 6) Secure Multi-party Computing: MPC [ 94 ] is a cryptographic protocol, which allows multiple parties to jointly calculate function results without a trusted third party, ensuring the privacy of input data, only outputting the results and protecting the privacy of all parties. 7) Differential Privacy (DP): DP [ 109 ] is a privacy protection technology, which ensures the privacy of data when it is released by adding noise to data analysis. Its core is that the output distribution of adjacent data sets is almost the same, even if the attacker has a lot of background knowledge, it is impossible to infer the privacy information of a single user. 8) Federated Learning: FL [ 37 , 94 ] is a distributed machine learning technology that supports multi-party joint model training without sharing original data. Participants process data and update parameters locally, then upload parameters to a central server for aggregation, thus protecting data privacy and achieving collaborative modeling. 9) Signcryption: Signcryption [ 55 ] combines digital signature and encryption functions to realize data confidentiality, integrity, and identity authentication. It encrypts data by unified operation and signature verification, which is more efficient and safer than using signature and encryption alone, and is suitable for various security requirements scenarios. 10) Identity-Based Encryption (IBE): IBE [ 122 , 157 , 175 ] is a public key encryption technology. The public key of users is directly related to their identity information, and the private key is generated and distributed by a trusted KGC. This mechanism simplifies public key management and makes encryption and decryption efficient and convenient. 11) Broadcast Encryption (BE): BE [ 32 , 162 ] allows broadcast centers to efficiently transmit encrypted information to multiple users, and only authorized users can decrypt it. It flexibly selects authorized users to prevent unauthorized access, and is widely used in digital rights management, satellite communication, and multimedia broadcasting. 12) Post-Quantum Cryptography (PQC): PQC [ 25 , 104 , 171 ] is a set of cryptographic algorithms and protocols specially designed to resist the attacks of quantum computers. Its core goal is to ensure the confidentiality, integrity and availability of information transmission and storage in the era of quantum computing.  

> J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018. 111:8 Yongyang Lv, Xiaohong Li, Ruitao Feng, Xinyu Li, Guangdong Bai, Leo Zhang, Lili Quan, and Willy Susilo
> Fig. 3. Data sharing process framework

3 Data Sharing Process and Its Security Threats 

This section begins by elaborating on the universal data sharing process framework proposed in this work. It then thoroughly summarizes and analyzes 20 potential attack types that can occur across different stages of data sharing. This analysis offers security protection targets for data sharing processes. 

3.1 Data Sharing Process Framework 

this work constructs a data sharing process framework that fully considers security, efficiency, and sustainable development. When devising this process, we first thoroughly study by multinational data security regulations [ 19 , 119 ], industry regulatory policies and government documents [ 95 ] to guarantee the legality and compliance of the data sharing process. Meanwhile, we actively draw on industry standards [ 18 , 92 ], international norms [ 27 ], and best practices [ 96 ] to ensure the process is scientific and advanced. Notably, specific industries can further refine the data sharing operation mode according to their business needs, organizational structure, and technical capabilities, all within this process framework. For details of the data sharing process framework constructed in this work, refer to Fig.3. The following provides a detailed description of each stage of the process. 

3.1.1 The Preparation Stage. The initial stage of data sharing is the preparation stage of sharing. At this stage, it is necessary to clarify the data standards and access rights, that is, to determine who can obtain what data. The specific contents include: defining the sharing goal and demand, authenticating the data demander, determining the data standard and source, and evaluating the risk of data sharing. 

• Determine sharing objectives and requirements: Define the objectives, uses and expected results of data sharing, and determine the types and scope of data to be shared. 

• Identity authentication: Strictly authenticate and authorize the identity of the data demander, and only licensed users who pass the authentication can proceed to the next stage. 

• Determine data standards: Specify data format, fields, value range, etc. to ensure data consis-tency and availability. 

• Determine the source of data: The source of data determines the quality and reliability of data. Data can come from public databases, professional institutions, internal data warehouses of enterprises, etc., and it is necessary to ensure the legitimacy and reliability of data sources. 

• Assess the risk of data sharing: Conduct a comprehensive risk assessment of the shared data, including data leakage risk, privacy invasion risk and data quality risk, and formulate corresponding risk response measures.  

> J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018. Privacy-Enhancing Encryption in Data Sharing: A Survey on Security, Performance and Functionality 111:9

3.1.2 Data Processing Stage. The data processing stage is the key link before data sharing. In this stage, a series of operations such as data collection, cleaning, integration, desensitization, encryption and audit are carried out in turn to ensure the confidentiality, integrity and availability of data in all directions. 

• Data collection: Collect relevant data according to the determined data source and collection method. In the process of collection, we should pay attention to protecting the privacy and security of data and abide by relevant laws and regulations. 

• Data cleaning: Preprocess the collected data, remove redundant data, correct errors, fill in missing values, etc., so as to improve the quality and usability of data. 

• Data integration: Data from various sources are integrated according to the determined data standards, so as to solve the problems of inconsistent data formats, fields and value ranges, and form a unified data set, which provides a basis for subsequent data analysis and sharing. 

• Data desensitization: Desensitize sensitive data and remove the identification that can identify personal identity or sensitive information. 

• Data encryption: Data is encrypted by encryption technology to prevent data leakage and unauthorized access, and to protect data privacy and security. 

• Data audit: Before data sharing, conduct strict quality audit on data to ensure consistency, integrity and accuracy of data, ensure credibility and effectiveness of data, and reduce potential risks caused by quality problems. 

3.1.3 Shared Implementation Stage. In the implementation stage of sharing, firstly, we need to select the sharing mode and build a data sharing platform or channel. In the process of sharing, access control is implemented, and fine-grained authorization is given to the data demander, and finally the data is delivered to the demander safely. 

• Selection of sharing mode: According to the nature and scale of data and the needs of participants, choose the appropriate data sharing mode, such as data interface sharing and data platform sharing. 

• Building a sharing platform or channel: If it is a platform-based sharing mode, it is necessary to build corresponding data sharing platforms, such as data warehouses and data lakes, and configure related functions such as data storage, management and access rights. For data interface sharing, it is necessary to develop and deploy standardized interfaces. 

• Data search: Many existing data are encrypted and stored in third-party platforms such as IPFS or cloud server. It is necessary to ensure that only authorized personnel can search relevant data, and at the same time ensure the security and privacy of the search process. 

• Access control: Implement fine-grained access control measures, limit the scope, frequency and mode of data use, monitor and manage the behavior of visitors, and ensure the security and compliance of data sharing. 

• Data transmission: Transmit prepared data to data demanders through the selected sharing mode, with guaranteed data security and integrity in transmission and storage. 

3.1.4 Data Usage and Audit Stage. After the data demander obtains the data, it must strictly supervise and audit the data use process and evaluate its use effect. 

• Data usage supervision: The data usage process can be monitored and recorded in real-time, covering operations such as data access, downloading and modification, as well as information such as data usage time, place and personnel, so as to find and stop violations in time. 

• Data audit: Audit the data usage regularly, check the compliance and safety of data usage, and make timely rectification when problems are found.  

> J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018. 111:10 Yongyang Lv, Xiaohong Li, Ruitao Feng, Xinyu Li, Guangdong Bai, Leo Zhang, Lili Quan, and Willy Susilo

• Evaluation of data usage effect: Continuously monitor data usage and evaluate the effect of data sharing, including data usage frequency, usage scenarios, contribution to business, etc., so as to find problems in time and make optimization and adjustment. 

3.1.5 Data Archiving and Destruction Stage. After the data is used, it is necessary to archive or destroy the data, and establish an effective feedback mechanism to optimize the data sharing process according to the feedback information. 

• Data archiving: Archive some data that are valuable for reference or need to be preserved for a long time in a specific storage medium and manage it properly so that it can be retrieved and restored when needed in the future. 

• Data destruction: When the data is no longer needed, the data shall be destroyed according to the data destruction strategy to ensure that the data cannot be recovered or accessed, so as to prevent data leakage and abuse. 

• Establish a feedback mechanism: Establish an effective feedback mechanism, collect data and put forward opinions and suggestions on the process of data sharing. 

• Optimization of data sharing process: According to the feedback information, adjust and improve the strategy, process and technical means of data sharing to improve the efficiency and effect of data sharing. 

3.2 Security Threats to The Data Sharing Process 

There are many possible attacks in the process of data sharing. Table 2 shows the possible attacks in each stage of each data sharing process. The following are 20 common attacks summarized: 

Table 2. Possible Security Attacks on Data Sharing Process       

> Stage Possible Security Attacks
> Preparatory stage Malware attack, Phishing attack, Spoofing attack, Insider attack, SCA, KGA, Quantum attack. Data processing stage Malware attack, DoS attack, HX-DoS attack, SQL injection attack, XSS attack, Zero-day attack, Eavesdropping attacks, Spoofing attack, Insider attack, Tampering attack, Forgery attack, ASA, Quantum attack. Shared implementation phase DoS attack, HX-DoS attack, MITM attack, SQL injection attack, XSS attack, Zero-day attack, Eavesdropping attacks, Spoofing attack, Replay attack, Hijacking attack, Tampering attack, Leak abuse attack, ASA, KGA, Quantum attack. Data usage and audit Malware attack, MITM attack, SQL injection attack, XSS attack, Zero-day attack, Spoofing attack, Insider attack, SCA, Replay attack, Hijacking attack, Tampering attack, Leak abuse attack, Forgery attack, Quantum attack. Data archiving and destruction Malware attack, DoS attack, HX-DoS attack, Spoofing attack, Insider attack, Tam-pering attack, Leak abuse attack.

1) Malware attack [ 58 ]: The attacker uses malware to infect the target system, steal data, destroy the system or control equipment. 2) Phishing attack [ 11 ]: Attackers trick users into entering personal information by forging legitimate websites or sending false emails, thus stealing users’ privacy. 3) Denial of Service (DoS) attack [ 124 ]: The attacker paralyzes the service of the data sharing platform or system through a large number of meaningless requests or data traffic, resulting in normal users unable to access data or use services. 4) Hybrid Denial of Service (HX-DoS) attack [ 58 ]: Attackers make the target system unable to respond to legitimate users’ requests by various means, which eventually leads to the unavailability of services.  

> J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018. Privacy-Enhancing Encryption in Data Sharing: A Survey on Security, Performance and Functionality 111:11

5) Structured Query Language (SQL) injection attack [ 28 ]: Tampering with or stealing database information by injecting malicious SQL statements into input fields. 6) Cross-site scripting (XSS) attack [ 47 ]: An attacker injects malicious scripts into a webpage, and when other users visit the webpage, the scripts will be executed in the user’s browser, thereby stealing the user’s session information or performing other malicious operations. 7) Zero-day attack [ 4]: Attacking by using software vulnerabilities that have not been discovered or repaired. Without prior preventive measures, such attacks can often cause serious damage. 8) Eavesdropping attacks [ 58 ]: Attackers illegally obtain sensitive information in transmission by listening to network communication. 9) Spoofing Attack [ 14 ]: Attackers cheat the system or users by pretending to be legitimate users or devices and sending false information or data, thus gaining unauthorized access or sensitive information. 10) Insider attack [ 58 ]: Internal personnel may leak or tamper with data due to negligence or malicious behavior. 11) Side channel attack (SCA) [ 58 ]: Sensitive information is obtained by analyzing indirect information generated by the system during operation, such as power consumption and electromagnetic radiation. 12) Man-in-the-middle (MITM) attack [ 124 ]: An attacker may intercept data, steal sensitive information or tamper with data content during data transmission. 13) Replay attack [ 58 ]: The attacker intercepts and retransmits the previously legal data transmis-sion to cheat the system or gain improper access rights, such as replaying the authentication request to gain continuous access. 14) Hijacking attack [ 58 ]: The attacker hijacks resources in the process of data sharing, such as network bandwidth, computing resources, etc., through malicious software or network attacks, which affects the normal data sharing. 15) Tampering attack [ 58 ]: The attacker falsifies the usage of data after sharing, such as modifying data usage records and audit logs to cover up illegal data usage. 16) Forgery attack [ 14 ]: Malicious users may generate false data, which will affect the quality and authenticity of data and lead to subsequent analysis and decision-making errors. 17) Leak abuse attack [ 97 ]: The attacker uses the specific information leaked by the encryption system and his prior knowledge to infer sensitive information, such as query content or data plaintext. 18) Algorithm substitution attack (ASA) [ 86 ]: Attackers use malicious algorithms with back doors to replace normal encryption, signature and other cryptographic algorithms, so that users can reveal secret information unconsciously. 19) Keyword guessing attack (KGA) [ 163 ]: Attackers gain unauthorized access to systems or data by guessing or using automated tools to try common keywords (such as passwords, keys, sensitive data, etc.). 20) Quantum attack [84]: Attackers use the powerful computing power of quantum computing to crack traditional encryption algorithms or implement other network security threats. 

4 Security Improvement of Data Sharing 

As digital transformation speeds up, numerous security challenges emerge during data sharing. This section explores how ABE, SE, and PRE bolster data sharing security. It systematically sums up and analyzes relevant studies, as presented in Table 3. 

> J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018.

111:12 Yongyang Lv, Xiaohong Li, Ruitao Feng, Xinyu Li, Guangdong Bai, Leo Zhang, Lili Quan, and Willy Susilo 

Table 3. Summary of Research on Improving the Security of Data Sharing by ABE, SE and PRE 

Paper Research Contents Encryption Technology Enhancement Technology Secu-rity Perfor-mance Functi-onality 

[69] Distributed or multi-attribute authority ABE, SE BC [50] Distributed or multi-attribute authority ABE, PRE BC, IPFS [141] Distributed or multi-attribute authority ABE BC, ZKP, CC [21] Distributed or multi-attribute authority ABE ZKP, BC -

[22] Distributed or multi-attribute authority ABE BC [126] Distributed or multi-attribute authority ABE BC, CC [24] Distributed or multi-attribute authority ABE, PRE BC, CC -

[125] Distributed or multi-attribute authority ABE, PRE BC, CC [154] Hiding strategy ABE BC [152] Hiding strategy ABE BC [153] Hiding strategy ABE BC, CC -

[13] Hiding strategy ABE BC, CC -

[137] Hiding strategy ABE, SE BC [104] Hiding strategy ABE PQC [167] Anonymous ABE ABE BC [165] Anonymous ABE ABE, SE CC, BC, IPFS [17] Anonymous ABE ABE BC [114] Combined blockchain SE BC [54] Combined blockchain SE BC, CC [174] Combined blockchain SE, PRE BC [80] Combined blockchain SE, PRE BC, CC [94] Privacy computing technology SE MPC, FL [134] Privacy computing technology SE -[109] Privacy computing technology SE FL, DP [16] Privacy computing technology SE BC, CC [173] Combined with cryptography knowledge SE CC [160] Combined with cryptography knowledge SE, ABE BC, CC [84] Combined with cryptography knowledge SE, PRE CC, IBE, PQC [140] Combined with cryptography knowledge SE, ABE, PRE BC, IPFS [166] Combined with cryptography knowledge SE CC, IBE [93] Blockchain and cryptography knowledge PRE BC [53] Combined blockchain PRE BC, ZKP [105] Combined blockchain and HE PRE CC, HE [3] Combined blockchain PRE BC, Signcryption [110] Combined blockchain PRE CC, BC [31] Combined blockchain PRE BC [107] Cloud computing PRE CC [170] Cloud computing PRE, ABE CC, ZKP [23] Cloud computing PRE CC, IBE [32] Cloud computing PRE CC, BE [138] Combined with cryptography knowledge PRE -[108] Combined with cryptography knowledge PRE IBE [121] Combined with cryptography knowledge PRE, ABE CC [136] Cryptography knowledge and HE PRE HE [176] Combined with cryptography knowledge PRE, SE BC, PQC [33] Combined with cryptography knowledge PRE, ABE CC [70] Combined with cryptography knowledge PRE CC [44] Combined with cryptography knowledge PRE CC [113] Combined with HE PRE HE [67] Combined with HE PRE CC, IBE, PQC Note: The comparison of security strength, performance and functionality is expressed as follows: > > .

4.1 Security Improvement Based on ABE 

ABE achieves fine-grained access control by linking data access rights to user attributes, allowing only users with specific attributes to decrypt and access data. In recent years, there has been a continuous emergence of ABE schemes incorporating blockchain, multi-authority, hidden strategies, and anonymity. These schemes not only enhance the system’s anti-attack capabilities but also adapt to dynamic requirements across different scenarios, offering a safer and more reliable solution for data sharing. 

4.1.1 ABE Based on Distributed or Multi-Attribute Authorities. BC offers ABE decentralized, tamper proof features and smart contract based automatic execution, enhancing data sharing security 

J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018. Privacy-Enhancing Encryption in Data Sharing: A Survey on Security, Performance and Functionality 111:13 

and enabling efficient management. References [ 50 , 69 ] realize the dynamic data access control via smart contracts, ensuring data sharing security and flexibility. Xu et al. [ 141 ] introduced an authorization mechanism that combines BC and ABE. The scheme incorporates a many-to-many matching mechanism. Through this mechanism, patients’ health data can be represented by multiple keywords, while doctors’ areas of expertise can be represented by multiple interests. Dai et al. [ 21 ]incorporated ZKP into BC, using its decentralized nature to prevent centralized verification forgery. In ABE, introducing multi-authority institutions aims to address the challenges of single-authority schemes, particularly collusion prevention. In multi-authority ABE [ 22 ], multiple authorities work together in key generation and distribution. Each authority manages a unique set of attributes. This collaborative approach not only enhances the system’s flexibility and scalability but also strengthens its security and privacy protection capabilities. Wang et al. [ 126 ] utilized multiple attribute authorization bodies to manage attributes. This design avoids single points of failure, enables patients to create custom access policies, and gives them greater control over their personal data. Duan et al. [ 24 ] incorporated multi-authority ABE technology, allowing several independent attribute authorities to manage attributes and distribute keys. When combined with PRE, this approach introduces agents. This enables DO to delegate access rights without disclosing sensitive information. Velmurugan et al. [ 125 ] employed data fingerprinting technology. This technology generates short fingerprints for shared data. It enables data checks before cloud storage, thereby helping to prevent data leakage. 

4.1.2 ABE Based on Hiding Strategy. BC’s tamper proof nature ensures data integrity and au-thenticity, preserving data value during sharing. However, its transparency may expose access structures and user attributes. ABE with hidden policy can achieve fine-grained access control while protecting user privacy by concealing access policies and attributes. Yang et al. [ 154 ] concealed attributes in the access policy by obfuscating the attribute mapping function. This prevents user-specific attribute values from being disclosed to third parties, safeguarding user privacy. Yang et al. [ 152 ] transformed the access policy into a vector-matrix format to mask attributes, preventing the leakage of authorized users’ private information. Yang et al. [ 153 ] employed polynomials and vector representation to shield user privacy. They verified whether a user’s attribute set satisfied the access policy using a method that combines Bilinear Pairing with Predicate Encryption, all while keeping the policy and attribute values hidden. Cai et al. [ 13 ] embedded the DO’s access policy with random numbers to hide it and protect privacy. Wu et al. [ 137 ] introduced inner product predicate to realize completely hidden access strategy and prevent sensitive medical data from leaking. POOMEKUM et al. [ 104 ] embedded the salted attribute-hashing Mechanism into the linear secret sharing scheme matrix can hide the real access policy even in the process of fog node processing. 

4.1.3 Anonymous ABE. In anonymous ABE, user attributes are concealed, preventing attackers from inferring attribute information from ciphertext or keys. Zhang et al. [ 167 ] integrated an anonymous verifiable algorithm with ABE to achieve double anonymity for users, protecting both parties’ identity privacy. Their approach also supports accountability for malicious users and enables right revocation, bolstering data sharing environment trust. Zhang et al. [ 165 ] enhanced anonymous CP-ABSE by hiding access policies and enabling flexible encrypted data control, while maintaining receiver anonymity. Chen et al. [ 17 ] preprocessed medical data with K-anonymity technology. They blurred quasi-identifiers that might reveal patient identities, ensuring data anonymity. 

4.2 Security Improvement Based on SE 

Traditional SE-based data sharing schemes encounter numerous challenges concerning security, privacy, and efficiency. Recently, the rapid advancement of BC, privacy computing technologies, and cryptographic foundations has offered novel approaches to enhance data sharing schemes  

> J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018. 111:14 Yongyang Lv, Xiaohong Li, Ruitao Feng, Xinyu Li, Guangdong Bai, Leo Zhang, Lili Quan, and Willy Susilo

security. Integrating these cutting-edge technologies has enabled more efficient and secure search functions in multi-user settings, as well as dynamic data updates and complex query management, thereby paving a new way for secure data sharing. 

4.2.1 SE Combined with Blockchain Technology. Traditional SE has several practical problems like fragile key management, centralized data storage risks, and search process privacy leakage. BC technology offers new solutions for SE’s data security and privacy protection. Shamshad et al. [ 114 ]proposed medical data sharing schemes that combine SE with BC. This improves data sharing efficiency and security while protecting patient privacy. Huang et al. [ 54 ] created a blockchain assisted cloudy storage model. It enables industrial data indirect retrieval via alliance chains, reducing single point failure risks and enhancing industrial data storage safety. Zhou et al. [ 174 ]presented a blockchain based lightweight SE sharing scheme for in vehicle social networks. It ensures efficient and secure data matching and sharing. Lu et al. [ 80 ] proposed a new searchable PRE scheme, which allows data buyers to verify the validity of search results without exposing the decryption key of the DO. And based on the smart contract of blockchain, the automation and fairness of data transactions in the Internet of Things are realized. 

4.2.2 SE Combined with Privacy Computing Technology. The integration of SE with privacy com-puting technologies offers a more reliable solution for data sharing and retrieval in complex environments. Muazu et al. [ 94 ] employed MPC technology to ensure that participants cannot access each other’s raw data during data fusion, safeguarding gradient parameters in FL systems. Building on MPC, Wang et al. [ 134 ] used Secure Multiparty Computation and Pseudorandom Function to generate search indexes, shared tokens, and search tokens. This approach supported dynamic user management, including additions and revocations, thereby ensuring the security and real-time performance of data sharing. Beyond MPC, the incorporation of DP technology into SE allows for the introduction of controllable noise during queries. This effectively hides keywords and access patterns, thereby enhancing security. Saidi et al. [ 109 ] significantly improved model accuracy while protecting privacy through DP technology and designed a personalized DP mechanism. This mechanism allowed clients to add Laplacian noise to model gradients based on a customized privacy budget. Chen et al. [ 16 ], leveraging DP’s strong security, combined DP with SE. They protected patient identity privacy by adding local noise to data, differentiating between identity and data privacy. They preprocessed patient identity data using DP technology and uploaded perturbed data to cloud servers to guard against attacks by untrusted third parties. When combined with ZKP technology, SE can verify the legality of search requests and data access without revealing additional information. 

4.2.3 SE Combined with Cryptography Knowledge. By integrating cryptographic principles, SE can protect data privacy through encryption algorithms and support secure searches on encrypted data. Zhou et al. [ 173 ] introduced the Cryptographic Reverse Firewall (CRF) technology. Deployed in trusted areas, CRF randomizes users’ keys, indexes, and search trapdoors, boosting resistance to backdoor attacks and protecting the security of these elements. Yin et al. [ 160 ] proposed a new three step interactive key generation algorithm. In it, user private key fragments are generated through interaction with all attribute nodes. This process conceals user identity information from attribute nodes, ensuring the privacy of both the information and the key fragments. Lattice based cryptography, especially schemes based on the Learning With Errors (LWE) hypothesis ([ 84 , 140 ]), excels in resisting quantum computer attacks. Zhang et al. [ 166 ] effectively prevented the cloud server from obtaining data privacy through Internal Keyword Guessing Attack (IKGA) by introducing authorization mechanism and technology of resisting IKGA.  

> J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018. Privacy-Enhancing Encryption in Data Sharing: A Survey on Security, Performance and Functionality 111:15

4.3 Security Improvement Based on PRE 

The integration of BC, CC, cryptographic foundation, and HE technology with PRE enhances PRE’s security in data sharing and drives its adoption in more intricate scenarios. 

4.3.1 PRE Combined with Blockchain Technology. The integration of PRE with smart contracts enables secure data storage and access authentication, effectively safeguarding data privacy and security. In the realm of privacy protection, Huang et al. [ 53 ] realized the safe sharing of patients’ medical data under privacy protection by combining ZKP and BC technology, and ensured the availability, consistency and traceability of the data. Prem et al. [ 105 ] put forward a secure electronic health cloud framework, ensuring data privacy protection alongside efficient data sharing. Turning to the area of data security, Mittal et al. [ 93 ] designed a novel group key management mechanism that utilizes blockchain to secure group encryption, thereby protecting the internal communications of medical teams and preventing data leakage and unauthorized access.Ahene et al.[ 3 ] use the distributed account book characteristics of blockchain to record all the access and modification operations of Electronic Health Record (EHR) data, provide transparent audit logs, and enhance the auditability of the system. Lastly, Sammeta et al. [ 110 ] presented an EHR sharing scheme based on blockchain and chaotic re-encryption. By harnessing the decentralized nature of blockchain and the high security of chaotic encryption, this scheme ensures the integrity and security of data. Garcia et al. [ 31 ] put forward a decentralized data governance framework that integrates BC, PRE and BBS signatures, so that DO can control data access rights and accurately share specific data attributes with the help of selective disclosure. 

4.3.2 PRE Combined with Cloud Computing. CC ensures data confidentiality, integrity, and fine-grained access control, yet still faces challenges such as data security, user privacy protection, and key revocation. To address these, Reddy et al. [ 107 ] combined PRE with ABE and introduced a trust and reputation model. This approach significantly enhances data sharing security and effectively prevents data leakage, tampering, and illegal access. Zhao et al. [ 170 ] combined the ABE and PRE technologies for EHRs in E-health Cloud, which realized the dynamic fine-grained access control of encrypted electronic health records, supported the big universe attribute space, partial hiding strategy and verifiability, effectively protected the privacy of patients and improved the security of the system. Deng et al. [ 23 ] propose the policy-based broadcast access authorization scheme, which integrates identity-based broadcast encryption and key-policy attribute-based encryption into PRE to address the flexibility issue in multi-user data sharing in clouds, achieving secure and efficient data sharing. Ge et al. [ 32 ] introduce a new key generation and revocation algorithm, enabling proxy servers to revoke designated receivers’ keys without exposing DO’s private keys. 

4.3.3 PRE Combined with Cryptography Knowledge. Group cryptography holds significant advan-tages in multi-user collaboration and group communication, effectively meeting complex network environment secure communication needs. Xia et al. [ 138 ] achieved high efficiency and security in resource-limited environment by using elliptic curve cryptography and optimized PRE scheme. Ren et al. [ 108 ] combined certificateless encryption with autonomous path PRE. This approach bypasses traditional certificate management complexities, allows data owners to fully control access paths. Mittal et al. [ 93 ] introduced a blockchain based group encryption mechanism to ensure secure medical team data sharing and prevent leakage risks. Sun et al. [ 121 ] applied key blinding technol-ogy to shield ABE users’ private keys. This prevents cloud server and Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) user collusion attacks. Nonetheless, group cryptography is vulnerable to quantum attacks. To address this, Wu et al. [ 136 ] employed ideal lattices to instantiate homomorphic threshold PRE. This ensures post-quantum security while maintaining lightweight computational complexity. Zhu et al. [ 176 ] achieved secure quantum key forwarding. By integrating the inherent true randomness  

> J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018. 111:16 Yongyang Lv, Xiaohong Li, Ruitao Feng, Xinyu Li, Guangdong Bai, Leo Zhang, Lili Quan, and Willy Susilo

and high security of quantum keys with PRE technology, their approach effectively supports secure multi-user sharing. Ge et al. [ 33 ] pioneered the use of bilinear pairing in constructing efficient verifiable and fair attribute-based PRE schemes. Their work ensures that users can verify the correctness of re-encrypted ciphertexts while shielding cloud servers from malicious accusations. Li et al. [ 70 ] proposed a scheme combining PRE and public key encryption with equality test, which can realize data search and secure sharing across different public key encryption on the premise of protecting privacy. Guo et al. [ 44 ] designed a non-interactive APRE scheme. By embedding the agent’s private key information in the re-encryption key, the re-encryption key is bound to the agent’s key pair, thus realizing the traceability of the agent’s behavior. 

4.3.4 PRE Combined with HE Technology. HE enables specific computations on encrypted data without decryption, while PRE allows for flexible access rights transfer of encrypted data between users. By organically combining these two technologies, a more powerful data processing and sharing mechanism can be constructed. Shaik et al. [ 113 ] proposed an homomorphic PRE scheme based on the LWE assumption, integrating the benefits of HE and PRE. Their scheme supports computations on encrypted data and enables flexible sharing of encrypted data among different users. Li et al. [ 67 ] extended the certificateless public key encryption scheme to the certificateless PRE scheme, which supports additive homomorphism for both original and re-encrypted ciphertexts, thus greatly improving data processing flexibility and efficiency. Wu et al. [ 136 ] presented a homomorphic threshold PRE scheme with re-encryption verifiability. It achieves strong privacy protection, fault tolerance, and verifiable aggregation with only linear operations involved. After ideal lattice instantiation, the scheme can also resist quantum attacks. Prem et al. [ 105 ] proposed a secure electronic health cloud framework combining HE and PRE, employing the Boneh-Goh-Nissim cryptosystem to realize HE functionality and ensure secure cloud data storage. 

5 Performance Improvement of Data Sharing 

On the premise of ensuring data security and privacy, ABE, SE and PRE reduce the computational and storage overhead through optimized storage structures, retrieval efficiency, and streamlined workflows, and greatly improve the overall performance of data sharing. This section systematically reviews and analyzes existing research on how ABE, SE, and PRE enhance data sharing performance, as detailed in Table 4. 

5.1 Performance Improvement Based on ABE 

In order to optimize the data sharing performance of ABE, the current research mainly focuses on designing outsourcing ABE, lightweight ABE and optimizing access policy architecture. These schemes significantly improve the efficiency of data sharing by improving the encryption algorithm and optimizing the calculation task allocation process, so that it can better adapt to complex and changeable application scenarios. 

5.1.1 ABE Based on Outsourcing. Outsourced ABE leverages third party decryption to alleviate local computational burdens, particularly benefiting devices with limited resources. In multi-user and dynamic permission settings, it adjusts user permissions with minimal key updates. References [ 72 , 158 ] enhance data sharing frameworks by outsourcing complex operations to cloud providers, lightening user computational loads. Miao et al. [ 91 ] split secret keys and distributed them to cloud servers, enabling these servers to handle most time consuming encryption tasks. They also introduced short signatures to verify server side encryption operations. Zhao et al. [ 172 ] proposed a fully outsourced and verifiable scheme supporting outsourced key generation, encryption, and decryption, without multi-round interactions or high verification costs. Yang et al. [ 154 ] outsourced 

> J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018.

Privacy-Enhancing Encryption in Data Sharing: A Survey on Security, Performance and Functionality 111:17 

complex decryption to third-party cloud servers and used blockchain’s tamper-proof nature to store verification parameters. This allows data users to verify third-party decryption results. 

Table 4. Summary of Research on Improving the Performance of Data Sharing by ABE, SE and PRE 

Paper Research Contents Encryption Technology Enhancement Technology Secu-rity Perfor-mance Functi-onality 

[158] Outsourcing ABE, lightweight ABE ABE CC, BC, Sig [72] Outsourcing ABE ABE BC [91] Outsourcing ABE ABE CC [172] Outsourcing ABE ABE CC [154] Outsourcing ABE ABE BC [20] Lightweight ABE ABE CC [98] Lightweight ABE ABE Signcryption, CC [10] Lightweight ABE ABE, SE CC [139] Lightweight ABE ABE, SE BC [128] Lightweight ABE ABE, SE CC [149] Optimize the access policy structure ABE CC [129] Optimize the access policy structure ABE, PRE CC, IBE [59] Optimize the access policy structure ABE CC [15] Optimize the access policy structure ABE BC [123] Optimize the access policy structure ABE CC [16] Storage optimization SE BC, CC [29] Storage optimization SE, PRE BC, CC [81] Storage optimization SE, ABE, PRE BC, IPFS [63] Storage optimization SE, PRE IPFS, BC [75] Storage optimization SE, ABE IPFS, BC [40] Query optimization SE HE [30] Query optimization SE -[145] Query optimization SE, ABE BC [52] Query optimization SE, PRE CC [146] Lightweight SSE SE BC [100] Lightweight SSE SE CC [65] Lightweight SSE SE CC [150] Lightweight SSE SE CC, BC [102] Binding IBE PRE IBE, BC [157] Binding IBE PRE IBE, CC [175] Binding IBE PRE IBE [122] Binding IBE PRE, ABE IBE, CC [76] Binding IBE PRE IBE, BC, Sig -

[171] Binding IBE PRE IBE, PQC -

[133] Binding BE PRE BC, BE [162] Binding BE PRE BE, IBE [32] Binding BE PRE CC, BE [107] Lightweight PRE PRE CC [106] Lightweight PRE PRE BC [127] Lightweight PRE, trusted third party PRE BC [74] Lightweight PRE PRE BC [155] Lightweight PRE PRE BC, IPFS [71] Lightweight PRE PRE, ABE -[45] Trusted third party PRE IPFS, BC, ZKP [131] Trusted third party PRE BC Note: The comparison of security strength, performance and functionality is expressed as follows: > > .

5.1.2 Lightweight ABE. Lightweight ABE reduces computational resource usage by simplifying encryption and decryption processes [ 158 , 167 ] or optimizing access policy structures [ 13 , 20 ], enhancing data sharing efficiency and access control. Yao et al. [ 158 ] employed lightweight sym-metric encryption algorithms to secure data transmission between terminal devices and edge nodes. By directly encrypting raw data based on attributes, they considerably boosted system computation efficiency. Cui et al. [ 20 ] assigned users with identical attributes to the same group and linked them to corresponding proxy servers, minimizing user interaction and proxy server conversion costs. Obiri et al. [ 98 ] enhanced system performance by optimizing the attribute-based signcryption scheme, reducing ciphertext size and computational costs. Bao et al. [ 10 ] developed a lightweight ABSE scheme, significantly reducing the computational load on resource constrained 

J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018. 111:18 Yongyang Lv, Xiaohong Li, Ruitao Feng, Xinyu Li, Guangdong Bai, Leo Zhang, Lili Quan, and Willy Susilo 

patients and doctors. Xie et al. [ 139 ] designed an Internet of Things (IoT) suitable lightweight data sharing scheme. By integrating inverted index structures and smart contract technology, it enables efficient data sharing on resource limited IoT devices. Wang et al. [ 128 ] proposed a lightweight key aggregation authorization SE scheme. Effectively countering “key forgery” and “trapdoor forgery” attacks, it ensures data security and privacy while enabling efficient authorization and keyword searching. 

5.1.3 Optimize the Structure of Access Policies. Many researchers have enhanced ABE’s data sharing performance by innovating access policy structures. Yang et al. [ 149 ] integrated multiple access policies into a unified one via a hierarchical access structure, reducing encryption and decryption computational overhead. Wang et al. [ 129 ] made system initialization algorithms and common parameter sizes independent of attribute numbers using the bilinear entropy extension lemma. This kept computational costs stable during encryption, decryption, and re-encryption even as attributes increased. Zhi et al. [ 59 ] applied the EM algorithm to cluster IoT device data, reducing redundancy and boosting processing efficiency, and then used ABE to ensure data security. Chen et al. [ 15 ] proposed a novel multi-attribute sketch storage method. Storing encrypted medical data hash values in blockchains, it cuts storage costs and improves query speed. Thushara et al. [ 123 ]introduced a session based data sharing mechanism. By creating sessions between fog nodes, it enhances data transmission efficiency and reduces data sharing delays and storage burdens. 

5.2 Performance Improvement Based on SE 

As data scales expand and application requirements grow, SE optimizes storage, enhances query efficiency, and cuts computation and communication costs via storage structure improvements, query optimizations, and lightweight SSE technology. These advancements significantly boost SE’s performance in large-scale data processing and broaden its application scope. 

5.2.1 Storage Optimization. SE faces performance bottlenecks when dealing with large-scale data storage and retrieval. Storage optimization measures, such as adopting block storage and optimizing index structures, can effectively reduce storage overhead and improve retrieval efficiency, thereby significantly enhancing SE’s performance. Chen et al. [ 16 ] describe a chain-on-chain and chain-off storage method, which stores security indexes via private and alliance chains respectively to prevent collusion attacks. Feng et al. [ 29 ] combined blockchain with private cloud storage, allowing industrial enterprises to store large amounts of sensitive data in private clouds. Classified metadata is stored in different blockchains, ensuring data security and reducing the storage burden on the blockchain. References [ 81 ], [ 63 ], and [ 75 ] indicate that the original data ciphertext is stored in IPFS. This approach ensures data security and efficient access, solves the single point failure problem, and improves the system’s reliability and storage efficiency. 

5.2.2 Query Optimization. SE faces a query efficiency bottleneck. Optimizing query algorithms and index structures can significantly enhance query performance. Guan et al. [ 40 ] enhanced HE’s encryption and decryption efficiency by optimizing modular exponentiation with a fast-exponentiation algorithm, reducing encryption and decryption times across different key lengths. Wang et al. [130] introduced a scheme with lower time costs than traditional sequential-indexing and other robust technologies, particularly effective for numerous keywords. Florea et al. [ 30 ]designed a customized coding method for network stream data to boost computational efficiency. Xu et al. [ 145 ] combined with overlapping clustering algorithm, introduced keyword weight sorting, optimized search path and sorting strategy, and improved search accuracy and efficiency. Hu et al. [ 52 ] uses expressive boolean query, which does not increase the search time and the total number of outsourced documents linearly.  

> J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018. Privacy-Enhancing Encryption in Data Sharing: A Survey on Security, Performance and Functionality 111:19

5.2.3 Lightweight SSE. SE is continuously exploring performance optimization. With many light-weight SSE technologies like symmetric encryption and key aggregation, its practicality in complex scenarios is enhanced. Xu et al. [ 146 ] combined dynamic searchable symmetric encryption with blockchain bit matrix storage, enabling efficient data retrieval and updates. Key aggregation tech-nology reduces the number of keys, lowering computational and storage overheads and improving system performance. Oh et al. [ 100 ] allows data owners to manage data and access control without a TTP, solving traditional encryption key management problems and boosting data sharing efficiency. Li et al. [ 65 ] introduced public key authentication encryption, ciphertext update, and keyword search. Using proxy updated ciphertext, they generated constant size trapdoor, addressing the linear increase of trapdoor with the number of senders in PAEKS schemes. Yang et al. [ 150 ] employed pairing free operations to simplify computations on lightweight devices and enhance efficiency. 

5.3 Performance Improvement Based on PRE 

In recent years, researchers have follow two directions to enhance SE. One combines SE with IBE and BE to optimize key management and data transmission. The other introduces lightweight encryption, refines algorithm design, and uses trusted third parties, significantly lowering computational complexity and storage demands. 

5.3.1 PRE Combined with IBE. IBE simplifies public key management by using user identities as public keys, though traditional IBE schemes have limitations in data sharing flexibility. PRE enables flexible access rights transfer for encrypted data, enhancing sharing flexibility and security. Integrating IBE and PRE aims to achieve more efficient, flexible, and secure data sharing. Pei et al. [ 102 ] applied IBE to key distribution, binding user identity and public key via identity hashing. This simplified public key management and enhanced data sharing security. Yao et al. [ 157 ] proposed a chosen ciphertext attack secure identity-based PRE scheme with single hop conditional delegation and multi-hop ciphertext evolution, supporting efficient cloud based data storage and transmission and optimizing cloud-service data processing. Zhou et al. [ 175 ] introduced a CRF to counteract backdoor attacks and ensure data transmission and storage security in risky environments. Tan et al. [ 122 ] controlled proxy-server re-encryption authority based on data attribute weights, constructing access policies that allowed only authorized users to decrypt ABE ciphertext. Liu et al. [ 76 ] proposed the efficient and secure key issuing IBE protocol, ensuring user identity legitimacy and improving medical data security. Zhao et al. [ 171 ] provided post-quantum security guarantees based on lattice cryptography, and employed IBE to achieve two-way identity matching-thereby safeguarding the sender’s identity privacy against access by other entities. 

5.3.2 PRE Combined with BE. The broadcast proxy re-encryption (BPRE) technology based on broadcast encryption can effectively send data to multiple recipients in the form of broadcast, com-bined with fine-grained access control mechanism, which significantly improves the efficiency and security of data sharing in multi-user environment. Wang et al. [ 133 ] presented a blockchain-based cross-domain data sharing scheme for edge assisted the Industrial Internet of Things, achieving flexible and secure cross domain sharing while safeguarding smart device privacy. Zhang et al. [ 162 ]combined BPRE with identity-based broadcast encryption, using vehicle identity-based encryption to lower computational complexity and enabling multiple authorized users to decrypt the same ciphertext. Ge et al. [ 32 ] proposed a revocable identity-based BPRE scheme. It supports flexible cloud environment data sharing and shields sensitive information like volunteer genetic data from unauthorized access. 

5.3.3 Lightweight PRE. By designing a lightweight PRE algorithm, the speed of ciphertext conver-sion or decryption can be accelerated, thereby improving the efficiency of data sharing. Reddy et al.  

> J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018. 111:20 Yongyang Lv, Xiaohong Li, Ruitao Feng, Xinyu Li, Guangdong Bai, Leo Zhang, Lili Quan, and Willy Susilo

[ 107 ] leveraged the efficient encryption and decryption performance and low resource consumption of AES to quickly process data in a lightweight PRE framework, which significantly enhanced the security and efficiency of data sharing. Wang et al. [ 127 ] employed the elliptic curve encryption algorithm to design a lightweight PRE scheme suitable for resource-constrained IoT environments. Raghav [ 106 ] utilized Bilinear Pairing to achieve efficient encryption and re-encryption operations, leading to improvements in computational cost, consensus time, latency, and throughput. Liu et al. [ 74 ] proved the superiority of the proposed scheme in security, efficiency and functionality, especially in the case of repeated sharing of EMRs, with lower computational overhead and better overall performance. Yang et al. [ 155 ] store the encrypted PHR in the IPFS cluster, and only the hash value from IPFS and the symmetric key encrypted with the patient’s public key are kept in the smart contract account, which reduces the blockchain storage cost and ensures data consistency and integrity. Li et al. [ 71 ] make the computational overhead in the encryption, re-encryption and decryption stages independent of the number of attributes through the carefully designed PRE key generation method, and keep a constant level. 

5.3.4 Based on Trusted Third Parties. In the blockchain environment, PRE’s encryption, decryption, and re-encryption operations, which are highly computationally complex, need to be verified via consensus mechanisms. This results in slow transaction processing and difficulties in meeting real-time requirements. To address the storage and performance challenges of PRE, researchers have proposed several solutions. Guo et al. [ 45 ] introduced an innovative dual channel storage mechanism and composite key query method to boost data query efficiency, offering a viable solution for large scale data sharing. Wang et al. [ 127 ] employed an on-chain and off-chain cooperative storage mechanism, storing metadata on the blockchain for effective data supervision and packaged data on cloud servers to conserve blockchain storage resources. Their data packaging mechanism allows edge servers to package data from smart devices, which reduces the number of interactions with the blockchain, thus reducing the computational and storage burdens of the blockchain. Wang et al. [ 131 ] utilized B + tree indexes to enhance the query speed and stability of historical health data and optimize the user experience of data sharing. 

6 Function Improvement of Data Sharing 

ABE, SE, and PRE ensure data security and enhance the practicality and convenience of data sharing. This section systematically summarizes and analyzes existing research on how these technologies improve the functionality of data sharing, as shown in Table 5. 

6.1 Function Improvement Based on ABE 

Achieving efficient, flexible, and controllable data sharing while ensuring data security and privacy has become a major challenge. With its unique advantages, ABE has become prominent in this field and has contributed to significant functional improvements. 

6.1.1 Access Control Management. ABE can flexibly authorize or revoke a user’s decryption rights, offering dynamic access control and fine-grained access management. It adapts to user group dynamics, boosting system flexibility and resource efficiency, and is widely used in fields like medical data sharing and cloud storage. Xu et al. [ 142 ] introduced the concept of Revocable ABE, supporting dynamic user groups via timestamp management and enabling decryption authority revocation at the start of each time period. Cui et al. [ 20 ] proposed an efficient revocation mechanism that updates only the proxy server’s conversion key, not all user keys, reducing computational and communication costs. They also designed an anti-collusion attack mechanism to prevent revoked users from conspiring with the proxy server. Mei et al. [ 89 ] leveraged puncturable encryption to let DO and DU independently delete specific data without third-party help. Ge et al. [ 34 ] used 

> J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018.

Privacy-Enhancing Encryption in Data Sharing: A Survey on Security, Performance and Functionality 111:21 

ciphertext delegation so the cloud server could revoke ciphertext directly without re-encryption, lowering computation costs and enhancing system flexibility. Islam et al. [ 56 ] enabled users to cancel or join multiple times via federated cloud architecture and enhanced tree-based group diffie-hellman trees without key redistribution, achieving efficient user management operations. Ge et al. [ 35 ] designed an authorization and revocation mechanism to prevent malicious users from accessing and abusing data without authorization. 

Table 5. Summary of Research on Improving the Function of Data Sharing by ABE, SE and PRE 

Paper Research Contents Encryption Algorithm Enhancement Technology Secu-rity Perfor-mance Functi-onality 

[142] Access control management ABE CC [20] Access control management ABE CC [89] Access control management ABE CC [34] Access control management ABE CC [56] Access control management ABE CC [35] Access control management ABE, PRE CC [69] Traceability and audit ABE, SE BC [73] Traceability and audit ABE, PRE BC, IPFS [50] Traceability and audit ABE, PRE BC, IPFS [158] Traceability and audit ABE CC, BC, Sig [41] Traceability and audit ABE CC [169] Traceability and audit ABE CC, Sig [129] Cross-cipher system ABE, PRE CC, IBE [122] Cross-cipher system ABE, PRE CC, IBE [1] Cross-cipher system ABE, PRE IBE [121] Cross-cipher system ABE, PRE CC [163] N-to-n scene, Static/dynamic search SE CC [100] N-to-n scene, Multi-keyword search SE CC [164] N-to-n scene, Multi-keyword search SE CC [36] N-to-n scene SE CC [146] N-to-n scene, Static/dynamic search SE BC [66] N-to-n scene SE CC [65] N-to-n scene, Multi-keyword search SE, ABE CC [174] N-to-n scene SE, PRE BC [30] N-to-n scene SE -[144] N-to-n scene SE CC, PQC [130] Multi-keyword search SE CC [156] Multi-keyword search SE CC, PQC [134] Static/dynamic search SE -[143] Static/dynamic search SE, ABE -[45] IPFS distributed storage PRE IPFS, BC, ZKP [159] IPFS distributed storage PRE BC, IPFS [93] IPFS distributed storage PRE BC [161] IPFS distributed storage PRE BC, IPFS [87] IPFS distributed storage PRE BC [83] Multi-hop PRE PRE CC [151] Multi-hop PRE, One-to-many data sharing PRE IBE [157] Multi-hop PRE PRE CC, IBE [168] One-to-many data sharing PRE, ABE -[77] One-to-many data sharing PRE IBE, BE [2] One-to-many data sharing PRE CC, BC [133] One-to-many data sharing PRE BC, BE Note: The comparison of security strength, performance and functionality is expressed as follows: > > .

6.1.2 Traceability and Auditing. In the intricate landscape of data sharing, traceability and auditing are vital for ensuring data safety throughout its lifecycle. Blockchain technology, with its tamper proof and distributed ledger properties, meticulously records all data sharing activities. This provides a robust foundation for data traceability and auditing. When combined with ABE, it enables fine-grained access control while logging all access requests and authorization details. This integration ensures the security, compliance, and reliability of data sharing. Extensive studies, including [ 50 , 69 , 73 ], have demonstrated the efficacy of this technological combination. These 

J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018. 111:22 Yongyang Lv, Xiaohong Li, Ruitao Feng, Xinyu Li, Guangdong Bai, Leo Zhang, Lili Quan, and Willy Susilo 

works show how smart contracts and blockchain technology can be deeply integrated to achieve data sharing traceability and auditability while protecting data privacy. Unlike blockchain’s approach to data traceability and auditing, many existing studies rely on cryptographic methods such as homomorphic signatures and certificateless signatures to verify data integrity and authenticate identities. Yao et al. [ 158 ] employed homomorphic signatures to sign each data block during data integrity audits. This allowed verification of the validity of certificates returned by the cloud server. A third-party auditor could then conduct efficient audits to ensure data integrity, avoiding complex zero-knowledge interactive proofs and aggregate signatures. Guan et al. [ 41 ] used certificateless authentication technology to audit the integrity of shared data files. This method sidestepped the certificate issues in PKI and the key escrow attack risks in IBE. Zhao et al. [ 169 ] proposed a scheme combining threshold authorization with traceability. Data owners could delegate multiple authorized users to complete authorization operations in a threshold-based manner, enabling the tracing of authorized users during the authorization process. This ensured the transparency and controllability of the authorization process. 

6.1.3 Cross-Cipher System. In cross-domain data sharing, PRE technology stands out for its efficient ciphertext conversion capabilities. When combined with ABE, it enables a one-to-many data sharing model, significantly enhancing data sharing efficiency. However, differences in cryptographic systems across trust domains pose challenges for ABE interoperability and cross-domain data sharing. Wang et al. [ 129 ] proposed the first unbounded cross-domain PRE scheme to transform IBE ciphertext into ABE ciphertext. Tan et al. [ 122 ] used PRE technology to convert IBE ciphertext into ABE ciphertext based on data attributes and their weights, achieving precise control over proxy server re-encryption authority. Deng et al. [ 1 ] introduced the Hybrid Attribute-Based Proxy Re-encryption (HAPRE) encryption paradigm, solving the problem of accessing ABE-encrypted data on resource-limited devices. They constructed two HAPRE schemes, proving their semantic security and anti-collusion capabilities. Sun et al. [ 121 ] proposed a verifiable and hybrid attribute-based PRE, which transforms ABE ciphertext into PKI ciphertext using key blinding technology to protect ABE users’ private keys and prevent collusion attacks between cloud servers and PKI users. 

6.2 Function Improvement Based on SE 

By introducing N-to-N scenarios, SE allows multiple users to efficiently retrieve multiple datasets. Its multi-keyword search enhances query flexibility and precision. Moreover, optimizations in static and dynamic search functions enable SE to better adapt to data dynamics, thereby improving the system’s overall performance. 

6.2.1 N-to-N Scenario. SE faces functional limitations in complex environments with multiple users and datasets. N-to-N scenario optimization enables SE to support efficient multi-user retrieval of multiple datasets, significantly enhancing system flexibility and usability. References [ 36 , 100 , 146 ,163 , 164 ] describe a retrieval scheme supporting many-to-many communication. It allows multiple senders to encrypt data for simultaneous retrieval by multiple receivers. Li et al. [ 66 ] proposed a secure cloud data sharing protocol with hierarchical keyword search. This enables multiple DO to share data with multiple users, with receivers accessing different data levels based on their authority. Li et al. [ 65 ] present a medical data sharing scheme for interactions between multiple DO and DU. It supports multi-user data sharing and access control. Zhou et al. [ 174 ] explored vehicle social networks and secure data sharing using blockchain and encryption. In one-to-many scenarios, DO need to share data safely with multiple users while ensuring data privacy and integrity. Florea et al. [ 30 ] examined encrypted-search schemes based on symmetric and asymmetric keys. This is vital for one-to-one scenarios where DO and query clients aim to enhance search efficiency without  

> J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018. Privacy-Enhancing Encryption in Data Sharing: A Survey on Security, Performance and Functionality 111:23

compromising data privacy. Xu et al. [144] constructed an efficient PAEKS scheme with quantum resistance, multi-user support and forward security. 

6.2.2 Multi-Keyword Search. SE enables accurate and efficient ciphertext environment retrieval through multi-keyword search, enhancing the integration of data security and search functionality. Wang et al. [ 130 ] detailed a multi-keyword search scheme based on zero-sum confusion Bloom filters and oblivious transfer, ensuring result unlinkability. Li et al. [ 65 ] introduced a non-colluding agent to update ciphertexts, achieving constant size trapdoor generation and solving the traditional issue of trapdoor size increasing linearly with sender numbers. Oh et al. [ 100 ] supported multi-keyword search with a bidirectional structured index. Users can directly match encrypted search indexes with search tokens and use index chains to locate relevant data, improving multi-keyword search efficiency. Zhang et al. [ 164 ] proposed a multi-client Boolean keyword search scheme. Its search complexity depends on the number of documents with the least frequent keywords, not the total documents stored, achieving sublinear complexity and boosting search efficiency. Yao et al. [ 156 ] proposed an ideal lattice-based SE scheme that not only achieves efficient multi-keyword retrieval but also guarantees keyword privacy in both the ciphertext and the search token. 

6.2.3 Static/Dynamic Search. SE can satisfy retrieval needs in both static and dynamic data envi-ronments through static and dynamic search functions, enhancing retrieval efficiency and flexibility. Static SE, being simpler and more efficient, suits straightforward scenarios like data archiving. Zhang et al. [ 163 ] proposed the DSB-SE scheme, which redesigns traditional Boolean SSE with a new transformation key module. This converts data-reader query formats to data writer query formats, achieving search speeds tens of thousands of times faster than conventional schemes. However, static SE’s inability to modify uploaded data spurred the development of dynamic SE, which allows post upload data modifications but introduces security challenges like forward and backward privacy protection. References [ 134 ] and [ 143 ] advanced a SE scheme enabling efficient data search and sharing while safeguarding forward and backward privacy. Xu et al. [ 146 ] intro-duced a blockchain-based dynamic SSE scheme. It ensures high retrieval and update efficiency, breaks down data barriers, and enhances the reliability and security of data sharing. 

6.3 Function Improvement Based on PRE 

To address traditional storage bottlenecks, the introduction of IPFS can realize efficient storage and secure sharing of encrypted data. Multi-hop PRE technology breaks through the single-hop limit and enhances the flexibility and fault tolerance of the system. PRE combines ABE and other technologies to expand its application in one-to-many data sharing scenarios. This section combs the relevant research progress and analyzes the innovation mechanism. 

6.3.1 Distributed Storage Based on IPFS. IPFS provides a reliable foundation for the storage and management of encrypted data by virtue of its distributed storage architecture, efficient storage space utilization and data persistence. It cooperates with PRE, which significantly improves data security and access flexibility by storing encrypted data, realizing fine-grained access control and efficient data sharing and distribution. Guo et al. [ 45 ] stored the encrypted medical data in IPFS in the dual-channel storage mechanism, which effectively isolated the medical data from the patient identity information and reduced the risk of privacy disclosure. Yeh et al. [ 159 ] combined the mechanism of Editable Blockchain and revocable IPFS for the first time, which overcame the problem that data in traditional blockchain could not be deleted and realized the function of completely deleting PHR. Mittal et al. [ 93 ] used IPFS technology to securely store medical data offline, providing high throughput and concurrent access. References [ 161 ] and [ 87 ] combine blockchain with IPFS,  

> J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018. 111:24 Yongyang Lv, Xiaohong Li, Ruitao Feng, Xinyu Li, Guangdong Bai, Leo Zhang, Lili Quan, and Willy Susilo

and with the distributed storage advantages of IPFS, the problems in data storage and sharing are solved, and the overall performance and security of the system are significantly improved. 

6.3.2 PRE Based on Multi-Hop. In the PRE domain, multi-hop technology stands out for its ability to incrementally transform ciphertext via multiple intermediate proxy nodes. This approach not only enhances the flexibility and security of the system but also effectively reduces the burden and risk associated with a single proxy node. Luo et al. [ 83 ] introduced a multi-hop re-encryption scheme. Their scheme allows for numerous ciphertext transformations, catering to the complexities of cloud environments. It delivers clear advantages in computational and communication efficiency. Yang et al. [ 151 ] developed a scheme that combines multi-hop capabilities with one-way properties and resistance to collusion attacks. This makes it well-suited for multi-user scenarios while bolstering data security and privacy. Yao et al. [ 157 ] put forward the first CCA-secure identity-based PRE scheme. This innovative scheme supports both single-hop conditional delegation and multi-hop ciphertext evolution, thus filling a critical gap in the field. 

6.3.3 One-to-Many Data Sharing. ABE, IBE, and BE are advanced encryption technologies with great potential for efficient, flexible one-to-many data sharing. They offer diverse solutions through different mechanisms, meeting fine-grained access control requirements and enhancing data sharing efficiency and scalability. Zhao et al. [ 168 ] proposed a new attribute-based threshold PRE scheme. It addresses the single point of failure in traditional schemes, boosting system robustness and security, and provides a safer, more flexible solution for fine-grained access control and data delegation. References [ 2 , 77 , 151 ] integrated PRE and IBE, using user identity information as public keys. This reduces public key management complexity and supports one-to-many data sharing. Wang et al. [ 133 ] designed a data sharing protocol combining BE and PRE. It leverages BE’s efficient one-to-many transmission characteristics for batch data distribution to multiple authorized users, significantly improving data sharing efficiency and scalability. 

7 Application of Data Sharing 

Privacy-enhancing encryption technologies not only secures data security but also boosts data sharing efficiency and flexibility, driving digital transformation across industries. Fig.4 presents the application field distribution of the 116 analyzed papers and recommends advanced papers in related fields. 1) Health Care: The secure sharing of patient records, images, and other medical data across institutions is essential, and patient privacy must be rigorously protected. When sharing medical data, PRE allows for the secure transfer of patient data to third parties for analysis without exposing sensitive information in plaintext [ 74 , 141 ]. Hospitals and research insti-tutions can dynamically grant access based on the attributes of doctors and other entities [159 , 170 ]. Within electronic health systems, SE enables the quick retrieval of keywords from encrypted medical records, further supporting efficient and secure data management [ 52 , 91 ]. 2) Internet of Things: IoT devices generate massive data requiring sharing across platforms and users. Given the limited resources of IoT devices, designing a lightweight encryption scheme is crucial for large-scale data sharing, ensuring data security and low-power device operation. In medical IoT, SE protects data privacy and boosts search efficiency [ 40 ], and ABE-based access control ensures safe sharing of medical wearable data [ 15 ]. In industrial IoT, designing multi-chain cloud-chain architectures or optimizing search algorithms can improve data search security and enable safe, flexible data sharing [ 29 , 54 , 127 , 133 ]. For cloud-assisted IoT, combining ABE, SE, and PRE protects device data privacy and supports cross-platform secure sharing and rapid response [ 89 , 122 , 158 ]. In internet of vehicles, schemes supporting  

> J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018. Privacy-Enhancing Encryption in Data Sharing: A Survey on Security, Performance and Functionality 111:25
> Fig. 4. Application field distribution of cited papers and recommendation of representative works

lightweight search or multi-user data sharing are suitable for scenarios like vehicle formation driving and traffic information sharing [162, 174]. 3) Cloud Computing: Centralized data storage and on-demand sharing are key features that also pose significant data security and privacy challenges. ABE enables flexible revocation of data, identities, and attributes [ 20 , 34 , 35 , 83 ]. Once a user’s rights or attributes change, promptly updating the encryption strategy can stop data leakage to unauthorized users and secure data. ABE can streamline multi-user data sharing in enterprise team-work scenarios, simplifying the entire process [ 151 , 161 ]. PRE makes cross-system and cross-user sharing possible [ 23 , 56 , 142 ]. It breaks down encryption barriers between different systems and user groups, thereby promoting secure and efficient data interaction. SE facilitates keyword search during data sharing. Users can directly search encrypted data in the cloud, quickly find needed information, boost retrieval efficiency, and ensure data privacy [36, 66, 164]. 4) Application Network: In the realm of smart grids, PRE serves as a powerful tool for safeguard-ing privacy and enhancing robustness. It ensures that data aggregation remains accurate even in the face of equipment failures and allows for universal verification of the aggregated results [ 136 ]. In the context of named data networking, the integration of PRE with symmetric mechanisms offers a comprehensive solution. This combination not only protects the pri-vacy of content but also prevents the leakage of ciphertext copies and sensitive information contained in content names [138]. 5) General Algorithm: The general algorithm is not designed for a specific field, but focuses on the bottom optimization of algorithm technology. At present, encryption technology is generally threatened by quantum attacks, and it is an effective technical path to study privacy-enhancing encryption technology against quantum attacks [ 84 , 104 , 144 ]. Multi-technology cooperation can break through the inherent bottleneck of single encryption technology in function, performance and security, and meet the multi-dimensional requirements of flexibility and expansibility [ 24 , 33 , 165 ]. The general algorithm with balance between security and performance can effectively reduce the calculation, communication and storage expenses of the algorithm under the premise of ensuring the confidentiality and integrity of data by means of lightweight cryptographic operations, and realize the cooperative consideration of the security protection ability and performance of the scheme [134, 150, 163].  

> J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018. 111:26 Yongyang Lv, Xiaohong Li, Ruitao Feng, Xinyu Li, Guangdong Bai, Leo Zhang, Lili Quan, and Willy Susilo

8 Discussion, Challenge and Future Direction 

This section discusses the problems in the existing data sharing schemes and summarizes the challenges in solving these problems. Finally, this work points out the future research direction for data sharing based on privacy-enhancing encryption technologies. 1) The optimization of data sharing scheme based on quantum security: The lack of anti-quantum capability is the core underlying security flaw in current data sharing schemes based on SE, PRE, and ABE, rooted in their reliance on classical mathematical problems such as discrete logarithm and bilinear pairing [ 20 , 33 , 74 , 83 , 89 , 141 , 158 ]. These problems can be efficiently cracked by Shor and Grover algorithms once quantum computing matures [ 7 , 25 , 37 ]. In terms of technical characteristics, the trapdoor generation and index matching of SE [144], re-encryption key derivation and ciphertext conversion of PRE [171], and attribute trapdoor construction and decryption verification of ABE all depend on the above mathematical primitives to achieve “a balance between security and functionality” [104], which further exacerbates quantum security risks. To address this issue, future efforts will focus on lattice-based cryptography optimization: The SE scheme can construct a trapdoor and index mechanism based on RLWE, leveraging lattice-based quantum resistance to ensure security [ 156 ]. The PRE scheme adopts ideal lattices to design anti-quantum re-encryption keys, guaranteeing the confidentiality of keys and ciphertexts [ 171 ]. The ABE scheme needs to break through lattice-based attribute trapdoor construction technology, utilizing lattice-based homomorphic properties to match policies and attributes, while resisting Grover algorithm attacks to ensure verification security [ 79 , 132 ]. 2) Security and performance optimization of data sharing in low-resource scenarios: In smart homes, smart healthcare, smart transportation, and other scenarios with low com-puting power and limited storage, the balance between the efficiency and security of data sharing is particularly prominent. In the face of large-scale data processing scenarios, the problem of excessive computational overhead arises frequently [ 54 , 134 , 136 , 163 ]. How to optimize algorithm design and reduce the time complexity of encryption, decryption, and search operations has become a core research issue that urgently needs to be addressed [170 ]. Meanwhile, the storage cost of encrypted data is much higher than that of plaintext data, which imposes significant pressure on specific scenarios with limited storage resources [127 , 133 ]. In inter-agency data sharing scenarios, efficient data transmission and sharing are highly dependent on reliable communication mechanisms [ 65 , 138 , 150 , 174 ]. Therefore, optimizing communication protocols, reducing transmission latency, and improving the real-time performance and response speed of sharing are also key directions in this field. To address the above dilemmas, it is necessary to construct an integrated solution from the two dimensions of security and performance optimization, combined with cutting-edge technologies. In terms of security enhancement: first, adopt a multi-algorithm fusion strategy to integrate the high efficiency of symmetric encryption and the high security advantages of asymmetric encryption, thereby designing a composite encryption scheme that balances effi-ciency and security [ 130 , 138 ]. Second, leverage blockchain and smart contract technologies to achieve decentralized control and automatic execution of data sharing, further enhancing system security and operational transparency [ 159 ]. Third, introduce advanced technologies such as differential privacy and data anonymization to upgrade the privacy protection mech-anism, ensuring that user privacy information is not leaked throughout the entire process of data sharing and retrieval [ 165 ]. In terms of performance optimization: First, develop lightweight encryption algorithms suitable for resource-constrained environments such as IoT devices and mobile terminals to meet the application requirements of scenarios with low  

> J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018. Privacy-Enhancing Encryption in Data Sharing: A Survey on Security, Performance and Functionality 111:27

computing power and limited storage [ 10 ]. Second, accurately optimize key lengths on the premise of meeting core security requirements, avoiding additional computational overhead and storage burdens caused by excessively long keys [ 71 ]. Third, establish an efficient key distribution and dynamic update mechanism, which significantly reduces the complexity of key management and provides support for the efficient promotion of data sharing [160]. 3) Building a trusted data protection system for the entire data lifecycle via multi-technology integration: Existing research on constructing a trusted data protection system covering the entire data lifecycle through multi-technology integration still faces numerous unsolved bottlenecks, specifically as follows: First, the depth of multi-technology integration is inadequate, making it challenging to build an integrated full-lifecycle trusted data protection system. Second, existing schemes struggle to retain the core capabilities of privacy-enhancing encryption while balancing data availability, multi-agent collaboration efficiency, and the depth of privacy protection, failing to effectively break through the core bottlenecks of traditional encryption schemes. Third, technical solutions have limitations in scenario adaptability. For data sharing requirements across diverse fields such as healthcare, government, and enterprise, there is a lack of universal and accessible solutions, hindering the safe and orderly flow of data. The future development direction can be divided into three core levels: First, at the data acquisition and preprocessing level, differential privacy technology is integrated to perturb raw data [ 112 ]. ABE technology is also used to encrypt the perturbed data. Only authorized users can obtain the original perturbation rules and encrypted data, thereby achieving a balance between data privacy and availability. This is suitable for large-scale sharing scenar-ios [ 64 ]. Second, at the data computation and analysis level, homomorphic encryption and federated learning technologies are integrated. In multi-agent collaborative data computing scenarios, there is no need for all agents to share raw data: homomorphic encryption technol-ogy enables authorized parties to directly compute on encrypted data, with the calculation results remaining accurate after decryption [ 57 , 62 ]. Relying on PRE technology, the secure circulation of encrypted computing authority is realized, supporting multi-agent relays to complete complex computing tasks [ 31 ]. Combined with the federated learning framework, all participants retain raw data locally and only encrypt model parameters for sharing via SE technology, achieving “data available but invisible” and effectively solving the problem of pri-vacy leakage in cross-enterprise and cross-domain collaborative analysis [ 118 ]. Third, at the data storage and access level, blockchain and privacy computing technologies are integrated [118 ]. A distributed data sharing platform is built using blockchain, where key information such as ABE’s permission policies, SE’s retrieval indexes, and PRE’s re-encryption records are uploaded to achieve full traceability and auditability of the data sharing process [ 147 ]. Privacy computing nodes conduct real-time verification of visitors’ identities and permissions, and smart contracts automatically enforce access control rules, further enhancing the credibility of data sharing [62, 68]. 4) Cross-institutional data collaboration boosts the development of emerging industries: Against the AI backdrop, its integration with medical, financial and transportation industries is significant. However, in practice, there are problems such as difficulties in establishing trust between institutions, and system heterogeneity, including inconsistencies in cryptographic systems, data formats, interface standards, and communication protocols, further raises the technical threshold for data sharing. In the future, it is necessary to build a trust mechanism and strengthen inter-institutional mu-tual trust to fully release the data value of “AI + Industry”, which can be achieved through the following paths: First, formulate reasonable incentive measures to stimulate the enthusiasm 

> J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018.

111:28 Yongyang Lv, Xiaohong Li, Ruitao Feng, Xinyu Li, Guangdong Bai, Leo Zhang, Lili Quan, and Willy Susilo 

of various institutions to participate in data sharing [ 133 ]. Second, develop heterogeneous system integration schemes and design solutions that enable secure cross-system communi-cation based on the differences between different systems [ 129 ]. Third, utilize middleware technology to develop and deploy cross-system middleware, complete data format conversion and communication protocol adaptation, and solve system compatibility issues [24]. 

9 Conclusion 

This work systematically reviews and organizes existing data sharing schemes based on privacy-enhancing encryption technologies. Firstly, a refined analytical framework is constructed, the complete process of data sharing is outlined, and various potential security threats are compre-hensively analyzed. Secondly, focusing on the three core dimensions in the field of data sharing: security threats, performance bottlenecks, and functional adaptability. 12 enhancement technolo-gies are summarized and integrated with privacy-enhancing encryption technologies. The research progress and practical outcomes of data sharing schemes based on this technology combination are thoroughly discussed with respect to the above three dimensions. Finally, we summarize and refine the existing advanced solutions capable of delivering privacy protection, intelligent enhancement, and cross-domain data collaboration across diverse scenarios. Combined with forward-looking research directions, this work offers valuable theoretical foundations and practical insights for the subsequent development and application of data sharing technologies. 

References 

[1] Hua Deng A, Zheng Qin A, Qianhong Wu B, Zhenyu Guan B, and Yunya Zhou C. 2020. Flexible attribute-based proxy re-encryption for efficient data sharing. Information Sciences 511 (2020), 94–113. [2] Kwame Opuni-Boachie Obour Agyekum, Qi Xia, Emmanuel Boateng Sifah, Christian Nii Aflah Cobblah, Hu Xia, and Jianbin Gao. 2022. A Proxy Re-Encryption Approach to Secure Data Sharing in the Internet of Things Based on Blockchain. IEEE Systems Journal 16, 1 (2022), 1685–1696. [3] Emmanuel Ahene, Joojo Walker, Rose Mary Owusuaa Mensah Gyening, Gaddafi Abdul-Salaam, and James Ben Hayfron-Acquah. 2022. Heterogeneous signcryption with proxy re-encryption and its application in EHR systems. 

Telecommunication Systems: Modelling, Analysis, Design and Management 80 (2022), 59–75. [4] Rasheed Ahmad, Izzat Alsmadi, Wasim Alhamdani, and Lo’Ai Tawalbeh. 2023. Zero-day attack detection: a systematic literature review. Artificial Intelligence Review: An International Science and Engineering Journal 56, 10 (2023), 56. [5] Mian Ahmad Jan, Muhammad Adil, Bouziane Brik, Saad Harous, and Sohail Abbas. 2025. Making Sense of Big Data in Intelligent Transportation Systems: Current Trends, Challenges and Future Directions. Comput. Surveys 57, 8 (2025), 1–43. [6] Najd Alfawzan, Markus Christen, Giovanni Spitale, Nikola Biller-Andorno, et al . 2022. Privacy, data sharing, and data security policies of women’s mHealth apps: scoping review and content analysis. JMIR mHealth and uHealth 10, 5 (2022), e33735. [7] Sijjad Ali, Shuaib Ahmed Wadho, Kazim Raza Talpur, Bandeh Ali Talpur, Khulud Salem Alshudukhi, Mamoona Humayun, Samar Raza Talpur, Mohd Abdullah Al Mamun, Muhammad Naseem, Adeel Abro, et al . 2025. Next-generation quantum security: the impact of quantum computing on cybersecurity—threats, mitigations, and solutions. 

Computers and Electrical Engineering 128 (2025), 110649. [8] Azhar Alsufyani, Omer Rana, and Charith Perera. 2025. Knowledge-based Cyber Physical Security at Smart Home: A Review. Comput. Surveys 2025, 3 (2025), 1–36. [9] Azhar A Alsufyani, Omer Rana, and Charith Perera. 2025. Enabling collaborative anomaly exploration in smart Homes: Eliciting user requirements and security scenarios. Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies 9, 3 (2025), 1–34. [10] Yangyang Bao, Weidong Qiu, and Xiaochun Cheng. 2021. Secure and Lightweight Fine-grained Searchable Data Sharing for IoT-oriented and Cloud-assisted Smart Healthcare System. IEEE Internet of Things Journal PP, 99 (2021), 1–1. [11] Santosh Kumar Birthriya, Priyanka Ahlawat, and Ankit Kumar Jain. 2025. Detection and prevention of spear phishing attacks: A comprehensive survey. Computers & Security 151 (2025), 104317. [12] Dan Boneh, Amit Sahai, and Brent Waters. 2011. Functional Encryption: Definitions and Challenges. In Theory of Cryptography - 8th Theory of Cryptography Conference, TCC 2011, Providence, RI, USA, March 28-30, 2011. Proceedings .J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018. Privacy-Enhancing Encryption in Data Sharing: A Survey on Security, Performance and Functionality 111:29 

Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, Chapter 16. [13] Jiayin Cai, Hongjie Zhang, Zhilin Duo, Xuan Wang, and Xingwen Zhao. 2024. A Multi-Group-Supporting Policy Hidden Fine-Grained Data Sharing Scheme in 5G-Enabled IoT With Edge Computing. IEEE Access 12 (2024), 46362– 46378. [14] CaoJunyi, ZhangKe-Yue, YaoTaiping, DingShouhong, YangXiaokang, and MaChao. 2024. Towards Unified Defense for Face Forgery and Spoofing Attacks via Dual Space Reconstruction Learning. International Journal of Computer Vision 132 (2024), 5862–5887. [15] Lin Chen, Yuxiang Chen, Wei Liang, Xiong Li, Kuan Ching Li, Jin Wang, and Naixue Xiong. 2025. MASS: A Multiattribute Sketch Secure Data Sharing Scheme for IoT Wearable Medical Devices Based on Blockchain. IEEE Internet of Things Journal 12 (2025), 1990–2001. [16] Liqiu Chen, Tao Feng, Rong Ma, and Jianming Shi. 2024. BTMDS: Blockchain trusted medical data sharing scheme with privacy protection and access control. Computer Communications 225 (2024), 279–288. [17] Yingwen Chen, Linghang Meng, Huan Zhou, and Guangtao Xue. 2021. A blockchain-based medical data sharing mech-anism with attribute-based access control and privacy protection. Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing 

2021, 1 (2021), 6685762. [18] China Association for Communications Standards. 2021. Industry Standard: Requirements for Data Security Protection in Industrial Internet. https://std.samr.gov.cn/hb/search/stdHBDetailed?id=C5E3C0720B3ECF68E05397BE0A0AD951# [19] Congress.gov. 2025. Electronic Communications Privacy Act. https://www.congress.gov/crs-product/R41733?q= %7B%22search%22%3A%22Electronic+Communications+Privacy+Act%22%7D&s=3&r=1 [20] Jie Cui, Bei Li, Hong Zhong, Yan Xu, and Lu Liu. 2023. Achieving Revocable Attribute Group-Based Encryption for Mobile Cloud Data: A Multi-Proxy Assisted Approach. Dependable and Secure Computing 20, 4 (2023), 14. [21] Weiqi Dai, Shuyue Tuo, Liangliang Yu, Kim-Kwang Raymond Choo, Deqing Zou, and Hai Jin. 2022. HAPPS: A Hidden Attribute and Privilege-Protection Data-Sharing Scheme With Verifiability. IEEE Internet of Things Journal 9, 24 (2022), 25538–25550. [22] Nhan Tam Dang, Ha Manh Tran, Sinh Van Nguyen, Marcin Maleszka, and Hai-Duong Le. 2021. Sharing secured data on peer-to-peer applications using attribute-based encryption. Journal of Information and Telecommunication 5, 4 (2021), 440–459. [23] Hua Deng, Jixin Zhang, Zheng Qin, Qianhong Wu, Hui Yin, and Aniello Castiglione. 2022. Policy-Based Broadcast Access Authorization for Flexible Data Sharing in Clouds. Dependable and Secure Computing 19, 5 (2022), 14. [24] Pengfei Duan, Zhaofeng Ma, Hongmin Gao, Tian Tian, and Yuqing Zhang. 2025. Multi-Authority Attribute-Based Encryption Scheme With Access Delegation for Cross Blockchain Data Sharing. IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security 20 (2025), 323–337. [25] Salahaldeen Duraibi and Abdullah Mujawib Alashjaee. 2025. Lightweight Post-Quantum Secure Communication Protocol for IoT Devices Using Code-Based Cryptography. IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics 71 (2025), 11228–11236. [26] European Commission. 2020. A European strategy for data. https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/policies/strategy-data Accessed on 2023-05-17. [27] European Parliament and Council of the European Union. 2016. Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data, and repealing Directive 95/46/EC (General Data Protection Regulation). https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/zh/TXT/?uri=CELEX:32016R0679 [28] Emna Fakhfakh, Maha Charfeddine, Nesrine Tarhouni, and Mohamed Amine Guettat. 2024. Combining TF-IDF, V-GAN, and XGB to Improve Next-Generation Web Application Firewalls’Ability to Detect SQL Injection Attacks. In 

2024 IEEE/ACS 21st International Conference on Computer Systems and Applications (AICCSA) . IEEE, Sousse, Tunisia, 1–6. [29] Jingyu Feng, Yue Li, Teng Wang, and Shuanggen Liu. 2024. A Certificateless Threshold Proxy Re-Encrypted Data-Sharing Scheme With Cloud-Chain Collaboration in Industrial Internet Environments. IEEE Internet of Things Journal 

11, 20 (2024), 33247–33268. [30] Iulia Maria Florea, Gabriel Ghinita, and Razvan Rughinis. 2021. Sharing of Network Flow Data across Organizations using Searchable Encryption. In 2021 23rd International Conference on Control Systems and Computer Science (CSCS) .CSCS, Bucharest, Romania, 189–196. [31] Rodrigo Dutra Garcia, Gowri Sankar Ramachandran, Raja Jurdak, and Jo Ueyama. 2022. Blockchain-aided and privacy-preserving data governance in multi-stakeholder applications. IEEE Transactions on Network and Service Management 19, 4 (2022), 3781–3793. [32] Chunpeng Ge, Zhe Liu, Jinyue Xia, and Liming Fang. 2021. Revocable Identity-Based Broadcast Proxy Re-Encryption for Data Sharing in Clouds. Dependable and Secure Computing 18, 3 (2021), 1214–1226. J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018. 111:30 Yongyang Lv, Xiaohong Li, Ruitao Feng, Xinyu Li, Guangdong Bai, Leo Zhang, Lili Quan, and Willy Susilo 

[33] Chunpeng Ge, Willy Susilo, Joonsang Baek, Zhe Liu, Jinyue Xia, and Liming Fang. 2021. A verifiable and fair attribute-based proxy re-encryption scheme for data sharing in clouds. IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing 19, 5 (2021), 2907–2919. [34] Chunpeng Ge, Willy Susilo, Joonsang Baek, Zhe Liu, Jinyue Xia, and Liming Fang. 2022. Revocable Attribute-Based Encryption With Data Integrity in Clouds. Dependable and Secure Computing 19, 5 (2022), 9. [35] Chunpeng Ge, Willy Susilo, Zhe Liu, Joonsang Baek, Xiapu Luo, and Liming Fang. 2024. Attribute-Based Proxy Re-Encryption With Direct Revocation Mechanism for Data Sharing in Clouds. Dependable and Secure Computing 21, 2 (2024), 12. [36] Chunpeng Ge, Willy Susilo, Zhe Liu, Jinyue Xia, Pawel Szalachowski, and Liming Fang. 2021. Secure Keyword Search and Data Sharing Mechanism for Cloud Computing. IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing 18, 6 (2021), 2787–2800. [37] Hadi Gharavi, Jorge Granjal, and Edmundo Monteiro. 2025. PQBFL: A Post-Quantum Blockchain-based Protocol for Federated Learning. Computer Networks 269 (2025), 111472. [38] Seyed Ramin Ghorashi, Tanveer Zia, Michael Bewong, and Yinhao Jiang. 2023. An Analytical Review of Industrial Privacy Frameworks and Regulations for Organisational Data Sharing. Applied Sciences-Basel 13, 23 (2023), 23. [39] Shafi Goldwasser, Yael Kalai, Raluca Ada Popa, Vinod Vaikuntanathan, and Nickolai Zeldovich. 2013. Reusable garbled circuits and succinct functional encryption. In Proceedings of the Forty-Fifth Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 555–564. [40] Shaopeng Guan, Youliang Cao, and Yuan Zhang. 2025. Blockchain-Enhanced Data Privacy Preservation and Secure Sharing Scheme for Healthcare IoT. IEEE Internet of Things Journal 12 (2025), 5600–5614. [41] Xuening Guan, Jinyong Chang, and Wei Zhang. 2024. Secure data sharing scheme with privacy-preserving and certificateless integrity auditing in cloud storage. Computer Communications 224 (2024), 285–301. [42] Zichen Gui, Kenneth G Paterson, and Sikhar Patranabis. 2023. Rethinking searchable symmetric encryption. In 2023 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP) . IEEE, IEEE, San Francisco, CA, USA, 1401–1418. [43] Cheng Guo, Wenfeng Li, Xinyu Tang, Kim Kwang Raymond Choo, and Yining Liu. 2024. Forward Private Verifiable Dynamic Searchable Symmetric Encryption With Efficient Conjunctive Query. Dependable and Secure Computing 21, 2 (2024), 18. [44] Hui Guo, Zhenfeng Zhang, Jing Xu, Ningyu An, and Xiao Lan. 2021. Accountable Proxy Re-Encryption for Secure Data Sharing. IEEE transactions on dependable and secure computing 18 (2021), 18. [45] Jinxi Guo, Kui Zhao, Zhiwei Liang, and Kai Min. 2024. Efficient and Secure EMR Storage and Sharing Scheme Based on Hyperledger Fabric and IPFS. Applied Sciences 14, 12 (2024), 5005. https://www.mdpi.com/2076-3417/14/12/5005 [46] Ishu Gupta, Ashutosh Kumar Singh, Chung-Nan Lee, and Rajkumar Buyya. 2022. Secure data storage and sharing techniques for data protection in cloud environments: A systematic review, analysis, and future directions. IEEE Access 10 (2022), 71247–71277. [47] Abdelhakim Hannousse, Salima Yahiouche, and Mohamed Cherif Nait-Hamoud. 2024. Twenty-two years since revealing cross-site scripting attacks: a systematic mapping and a comprehensive survey. Computer Science Review 52 (2024), 100634. [48] Meng Hao, Hanxiao Chen, Hongwei Li, Chenkai Weng, Yuan Zhang, Haomiao Yang, and Tianwei Zhang. 2024. Scalable zero-knowledge proofs for non-linear functions in machine learning. In 33rd USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 24) . USENIX Association, Philadelphia, PA, USA, 3819–3836. [49] Anna Hermansen, Dean A. Regier, and Samantha Pollard. 2022. Developing Data Sharing Models for Health Research with Real-World Data: A Scoping Review of Patient and Public Preferences. Journal of Medical Systems 46, 12 (2022), 1–12. [50] Yujie Hong, Liang Yang, Wei Liang, and Anke Xie. 2024. Secure Access Control for Electronic Health Records in Blockchain-Enabled Consumer Internet of Medical Things. IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics 70, 1 (2024), 4574–4584. [51] Jinqiu Hou, Changgen Peng, and Weijie Tan. 2024. A lattice-based data sharing functional encryption scheme with HRA security for IoT. Expert Systems with Applications 254, 000 (2024), 12. [52] Boli Hu, Kai Zhang, Junqing Gong, Lifei Wei, and Jianting Ning. 2024. Designated server proxy re-encryption with boolean keyword search for E-Health Clouds. Journal of Information Security and Applications 83 (2024), 103783. [53] Haiping Huang, Peng Zhu, Fu Xiao, Xiang Sun, and Qinglong Huang. 2020. A Blockchain-based Scheme for Privacy-Preserving and Secure Sharing of Medical Data. Computers & Security 99 (2020), 102010. [54] Wenhua Huang, Yan Chen, Dong Jing, Jingyu Feng, Gang Han, and Wenbo Zhang. 2024. A Multicloud Collaborative Data Security Sharing Scheme With Blockchain Indexing in Industrial Internet Environments. IEEE Internet of Things Journal 11, 16 (2024), 13. [55] Negalign Wake Hundera, Muhammad Umar Aftab, Dagmawit Mesfin, Fatene Dioubi, Huiying Xu, and Xinzhong Zhu. 2024. An efficient heterogeneous online/offline anonymous certificateless signcryption with proxy re-encryption for J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018. Privacy-Enhancing Encryption in Data Sharing: A Survey on Security, Performance and Functionality 111:31 

Internet of Vehicles. Vehicular Communications 49 (2024), 100811. [56] Azharul Islam and Sanjay K Madria. 2022. Attribute-Based Encryption Scheme for Secure Multi-Group Data Sharing in Cloud. Services Computing, IEEE Trans. on (T-SC) 15, 4 (2022), 15. [57] Cheng Jiang, Xue Li, Dajun Du, Hong Qian, Mi Wen, Lei Wu, and Rolf Findeisen. 2025. Privacy Preservation for Cloud-Edge-Collaborative Energy Management System Using Post-Quantum Homomorphic Encryption. IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid 16 (2025), 3282–3294. [58] Shadab Kalhoro, Farhan Bashir Shaikh, Anam Kalhoro, Junaid Ur Rehman Abbasi, and Ramesh Kumar Ayyasamy. 2024. An Overview of Security Attacks in 5G Enabled Technologies: Applications and Use Case Scenarios. ISeCure 16, 1 (2024), 17–35. [59] P. Kanimozhi and T. Aruldoss Albert Victoire. 2020. Secure sharing of IOT data in cloud environment using attribute based encryption. Journal of Circuits, Systems and Computers 30, 06 (2020), 2150102. [60] Marcel Keller. 2020. MP-SPDZ: A Versatile Framework for Multi-Party Computation. In CCS ’20: 2020 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1575–1590. [61] Sita Kumari Kotha, Meesala Shobha Rani, Bharat Subedi, Anilkumar Chunduru, and V E Sathishkumar. 2021. A Comprehensive Review on Secure Data Sharing in Cloud Environment. Wireless Personal Communications 127, 4 (2021), 2161–2188. [62] Rajesh Kumar, Shaoning Zeng, Jay Kumar, Xinfeng Mao, et al . 2025. Privacy-preserving federated transfer learning for enhanced liver lesion segmentation in PET-CT imaging. Artificial Intelligence in Medicine 169 (2025), 103245. [63] Chuanping Li and Juxiang Tang. 2023. Searchable Proxy Re-Encryption Data Sharing Scheme Based on Consortium Chain. In 2023 3rd International Conference on Computer Science and Blockchain (CCSB) . CCSB, Shenzhen, China, 121–132. [64] Dun Li, Noel Crespi, Roberto Minerva, Wei Liang, Kuan-Ching Li, and Joanna Kołodziej. 2025. DPS-IIoT: Non-interactive zero-knowledge proof-inspired access control towards information-centric Industrial Internet of Things. 

Computer Communications 233 (2025), 108065. [65] Hongbo Li, Qiong Huang, Jianye Huang, and Willy Susilo. 2023. Public-Key Authenticated Encryption With Keyword Search Supporting Constant Trapdoor Generation and Fast Search. IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security 18 (2023), 396–410. [66] Hongbo Li, Qiong Huang, and Willy Susilo. 2022. A Secure Cloud Data Sharing Protocol for Enterprise Supporting Hierarchical Keyword Search. IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing 19 (2022), 1532–1543. [67] Juyan Li, Mingyan Yan, Jialiang Peng, Haodong Huang, and Ahmed A. Abd El-Latif. 2024. A lattice-based efficient certificateless public key encryption for big data security in clouds. Future Generation Computer Systems 158 (2024), 255–266. [68] Kun-Chang Li. 2024. Privacy-Preserving Scheme With Smart Contracts and Quadtree in 5G for Fog-Enhanced Smart Logistics. IEEE Internet of Things Journal 12 (2024), 9058–9068. [69] Siyue Li, Kele Niu, and Bin Wu. 2025. A blockchain-based secure data sharing scheme with efficient attribute revocation. Journal of Systems Architecture 159 (2025), 103309. [70] Wenchao Li, Chuanjie Jin, Saru Kumari, Hu Xiong, and Sachin Kumar. 2020. Proxy re-encryption with equality test for secure data sharing in Internet of Things-based healthcare systems: NA. Transactions on Emerging Telecommunications Technologies 33, 2 (2020), e3986. [71] Xiaoxiao Li, Yong Xie, Hui Wang, Xing Su, and Haifeng Li. 2024. dAPRE:Efficient and Reliable Attribute-Based Proxy Re-Encryption Using DAG for Data Sharing in IoT. IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics 70, 1 (2024), 584–596. [72] Junyu Lin, Libo Feng, Jinli Wang, Fei Qiu, Bei Yu, Jing Cheng, and Shaowen Yao. 2024. FGDB-MLPP: A fine-grained data-sharing scheme with blockchain based on multi-level privacy protection. IET Communications (COM) 18, 4 (2024), 13. [73] Guijiang Liu, Haibo Xie, Wenming Wang, and Haiping Huang. 2024. A secure and efficient electronic medical record data sharing scheme based on blockchain and proxy re-encryption. Journal of cloud computing 13, 1 (2024), 44. [74] Jingwei Liu, Weiyang Jiang, Rong Sun, Ali Kashif Bashir, Mohammad Dahman Alshehri, Qiaozhi Hua, and Keping Yu. 2023. Conditional Anonymous Remote Healthcare Data Sharing Over Blockchain. Journal on Biomedical and Health Informatics (J-BHI) 27, 5 (2023), 12. [75] Jingwei Liu, Mingli Wu, Rong Sun, Xiaojiang Du, and Mohsen Guizani. 2021. BMDS: A Blockchain-based Medical Data Sharing Scheme with Attribute-Based Searchable Encryption. In ICC 2021 - IEEE International Conference on Communications . IEEE, Montreal, QC, Canada, 1–6. [76] Linchen Liu, Ruyan Liu, Zhiying Lv, Ding Huang, and Xing Liu. 2024. Dual blockchain-based data sharing mechanism with privacy protection for medical internet of things. Heliyon 10, 1 (2024), 14. [77] Shuanggen Liu, Hui Song, Xu An Wang, Yuxin He, and Yifan Song. 2024. Secure Data Sharing in V2N Based on a Privacy-Preserving Identify-Based Broadcast Proxy Re-Encryption Plus Scheme. IEEE Network 38, 3 (2024), 70–75. J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018. 111:32 Yongyang Lv, Xiaohong Li, Ruitao Feng, Xinyu Li, Guangdong Bai, Leo Zhang, Lili Quan, and Willy Susilo 

[78] Yihao Liu, Jinhe Huang, Yanjie Li, Dong Wang, and Bin Xiao. 2024. Generative AI model privacy: a survey. Artificial Intelligence Review 58, 1 (2024), 33. [79] Yuan Liu, Licheng Wang, and Yongbin Zhou. 2025. A novel CLWE-based attribute-based encryption scheme from lattices with privacy preserving. Cybersecurity 8, 1 (2025), 76. [80] Xin Lu, Zijian Zhang, Tyler Zhou, Tao Niu, Meng Li, Zhitao Guan, Teng Ma, and Liehuang Zhu. 2024. Decentralized Fair IoT Data Trading via Searchable Proxy Re-Encryption. IEEE Internet of Things Journal 11, 11 (2024), 19485–19499. [81] Ye Lu, Tao Feng, Chunyan Liu, and Wenbo Zhang. 2024. A Blockchain and CP-ABE Based Access Control Scheme with Fine-Grained Revocation of Attributes in Cloud Health. Computers, Materials & Continua 78, 2 (2024), 2787–2811. [82] Yunlong Lu, Xiaohong Huang, Yueyue Dai, Sabita Maharjan, and Yan Zhang. 2020. Blockchain and Federated Learning for Privacy-Preserved Data Sharing in Industrial IoT. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics 16 (2020), 4177–4186. [83] Fucai Luo, Haiyan Wang, Willy Susilo, Xingfu Yan, and Xiaofan Zheng. 2024. Public trace-and-revoke proxy re-encryption for secure data sharing in clouds. IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security 19 (2024), 2919–2934. [84] LuoFucai, WangHaiyan, and YanXingfu. 2024. Re-PAEKS: Public-Key Authenticated Re-Encryption With Keyword Search. IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing 23 (2024), 10077–10092. [85] Yongyang Lv, Ruitao Feng, Maode Ma, Manqing Zhu, Hanwei Wu, and Xiaohong Li. 2024. Reinventing Multi-User Authentication Security From Cross-Chain Perspective. IEEE transactions on information forensics and security 19 (2024), 8908–8923. [86] Yongyang Lv, Xiaohong Li, Kui Chen, Zhe Hou, Guangdong Bai, and Ruitao Feng. 2025. MedExChain: Enabling Secure and Efficient PHR Sharing Across Heterogeneous Blockchains. IEEE Internet of Things Journal 12 (2025), 32932–32950. [87] Yongyang Lv, Xiaohong Li, Yingwenbo Wang, Kui Chen, Zhe Hou, and Ruitao Feng. 2024. Cross-chain sharing of personal health records: Heterogeneous and interoperable blockchains. In 2024 IEEE International Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine (BIBM) . IEEE, BIBM, Lisbon, Portugal, 3588–3591. [88] Lauren Maxwell, Priya Shreedhar, Delphine Dauga, Peter McQuilton, Robert F Terry, Alisa Denisiuk, Fruzsina Molnar-Gabor, Abha Saxena, and Susanna-Assunta Sansone. 2023. FAIR, ethical, and coordinated data sharing for COVID-19 response: a scoping review and cross-sectional survey of COVID-19 data sharing platforms and registries. The Lancet Digital Health 5, 10 (2023), e712–e736. [89] Qian Mei, Minghao Yang, Jinhao Chen, Lili Wang, and Hu Xiong. 2023. Expressive Data Sharing and Self-Controlled Fine-Grained Data Deletion in Cloud-Assisted IoT. Dependable and Secure Computing 20, 3 (2023), 16. [90] Long Meng, Liqun Chen, Yangguang Tian, Mark Manulis, and Suhui Liu. 2024. {FEASE }: Fast and Expressive Asymmetric Searchable Encryption. In 33rd USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 24) . USENIX Association, Philadelphia, PA, USA, 2545–2562. [91] Yinbin Miao, Feng Li, Xinghua Li, Jianting Ning, Hongwei Li, Kim Kwang Raymond Choo, and Robert H. Deng. 2024. Verifiable Outsourced Attribute-Based Encryption Scheme for Cloud-Assisted Mobile E-Health System. Dependable and Secure Computing 21, 4 (2024), 18. [92] Ministry of Public Security of the People’s Republic of China. 2020. Industry Standard: Information Security Technology - Security Technical Requirements for Big Data Platform Security Management Products. https: //std.samr.gov.cn/hb/search/stdHBDetailed?id=AC7E3136BDF6A8E4E05397BE0A0A6C9B [93] Shweta Mittal and Mohona Ghosh. 2024. A three-phase framework for secure storage and sharing of healthcare data based on blockchain, IPFS, proxy re-encryption and group communication. Journal of Supercomputing 80, 6 (2024), 7955–7992. [94] T. Muazu, Y. Mao, and Muhammad A.U.Kumshe U.M.M.Ibrahim M.Samuel O. 2024. A federated learning system with data fusion for healthcare using multi-party computation and additive secret sharing. Computer communications 216, Feb. (2024), 168–182. [95] National Health Commission of the People’s Republic of China. 2018. Interim Measures for the Management of Standards, Security, and Services of National Health Medical Big Data. https://wsjkw.sc.gov.cn/scwsjkw/gz1/2021/7/ 19/c9ccaab6815444e9dc7b257f83493f9.shtml [96] National Information Security Standardization Technical Committee Secretariat. 2023. Cybersecurity Standard Practice Guide - Implementation Guide for Network Data Security Risk Assessment. https://www.tc260.org.cn/front/ postDetail.html?id=20230529155314 [97] Jianting Ning, Xinyi Huang, G. Poh, Jiaming Yuan, Yingjiu Li, J. Weng, and R. Deng. 2021. LEAP: Leakage-Abuse Attack on Efficiently Deployable, Efficiently Searchable Encryption with Partially Known Dataset. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2307–2320. [98] I. Obiri, Qi Xia, Hu Xia, Eric Affum, Abla Smahi, and Jianbin Gao. 2021. Personal health records sharing scheme based on attribute based signcryption with data integrity verifiable. J. Comput. Secur. 30 (2021), 291–324. J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018. Privacy-Enhancing Encryption in Data Sharing: A Survey on Security, Performance and Functionality 111:33 

[99] Office of Management and Budget (OMB). 2020. OMB Finalizes Federal Data Strategy 2020 Action Plan. https: //www.meritalk.com/articles/omb-finalizes-federal-data-strategy-2020-action-plan/ Accessed on 2023-05-17. [100] Jihyeon Oh, JoonYoung Lee, MyeongHyun Kim, Youngho Park, KiSung Park, and SungKee Noh. 2022. A Secure Data Sharing Based on Key Aggregate Searchable Encryption in Fog-Enabled IoT Environment. IEEE Transactions on Network Science and Engineering 9, 6 (2022), 4468–4481. [101] Dana K. Pasquale, Tom Wolff, Gabriel Varela, Jimi Adams, Peter J. Mucha, Brea L. Perry, Thomas W. Valente, and James Moody. 2025. Considerations for Social Networks and Health Data Sharing: An Overview. Annals of Epidemiology 

102, 000 (2025), 28–35. [102] Hongmei Pei, Peng Yang, Weihao Li, Miao Du, and Zhongjian Hu. 2024. Proxy re-encryption for secure data sharing with blockchain in internet of medical things. Computer Networks 245 (2024), 110373. [103] People’s Daily. 2023. Digital China Construction Action Plan for 2025. https://www.gov.cn/zhengce/202505/content_ 7024039.htm Accessed on 2023-05-17. [104] Potchakorn Poomekum, Arisara Suriyawong, and Somchart Fugkeaw. 2025. Fine-Grained and Lightweight Quantum-Resistant Access Control System With Efficient Revocation for IoT Cloud. IEEE Open Journal of the Communications Society 6 (2025), 8652–8666. [105] V. Prem and I. Priyadharshini. 2020. Secure e-health cloud framework for patients’ EHR storage and sharing for Indian Government healthcare model. Proceedings of the Estonian Academy of Sciences 69 (2020), 266 – 276. [106] Raghav, Nitish Andola, S Venkatesan, and Shekhar Verma. 2023. Privacy-preserving cloud data sharing for healthcare systems with hybrid blockchain. Peer-to-Peer Networking and Applications 16, 5 (2023), 2525–2547. [107] K. V. Narasimha Reddy, Dodda Venkata Reddy, Padamata Ramesh Babu, Raman G R Anantha, and S Balasubramani. 2024. A Novel Proxy Re-Encryption Technique for Secure Data Sharing in Cloud Environment. In 2024 International Conference on Advances in Data Engineering and Intelligent Computing Systems (ADICS) . ADICS, Chennai, India, 1–5. [108] Chengdong Ren, Xiaolei Dong, Jiachen Shen, Zhenfu Cao, and Yuanjian Zhou. 2022. CLAP-PRE: Certificateless Autonomous Path Proxy Re-Encryption for Data Sharing in the Cloud. Applied Sciences (2076-3417) 12, 9 (2022), 4353. [109] Rihab Saidi, Tarek Moulahi, Suliman Aladhadh, and Salah Zidi. 2024. Advancing Federated Learning: Optimizing Model Accuracy through Privacy-Conscious Data Sharing. In 2024 IEEE 25th International Symposium on a World of Wireless, Mobile and Multimedia Networks (WoWMoM) . IEEE, Perth, Australia, 64–69. [110] Naresh Sammeta and Latha Parthiban. 2023. Blockchain-based Scalable and Secure EHR Data Sharing using Proxy Re-Encryption. International Arab Journal of Information Technology (IAJIT) 20, 5 (2023), 702–710. [111] James Scheibner, Nicole Kroesche, Luke Wakefield, Tina Cockburn, Steven M. Mcphail, and Bernadette Richards. 2023. Does Legislation Impede Data Sharing in Australia Across Institutions and Jurisdictions? A Scoping Review. 

Journal of Medical Systems 47, 1 (2023), 116. [112] Sakib Shahriar, Rozita Dara, and Rajen Akalu. 2025. A comprehensive review of current trends, challenges, and opportunities in text data privacy. Computers & Security 151 (2025), 104358. [113] Imtiyazuddin Shaik, Arinjita Paul, M A Rajan, and Divyesh Saglani. 2025. Efficient privacy enabled data sharing in cloud using a novel Homomorphic Proxy Re-Encryption Scheme. In 2025 17th International Conference on COMmunication Systems and NETworks (COMSNETS) . IEEE, Bengaluru, India, 1329–1334. [114] Salman Shamshad, Minahil, Khalid Mahmood, Saru Kumari, and Chien Ming Chen. 2020. A secure blockchain-based e-health records storage and sharing scheme. Information Security Technical Report 55, Deca (2020), 102590.1–102590.17. [115] Jun Shao, Zhenfu Cao, Xiaohui Liang, and Huang Lin. 2010. Proxy re-encryption with keyword search. Information Sciences 180, 13 (2010), 2576–2587. [116] Fanfan Shen, Lin Shi, Jun Zhang, Chao Xu, Yong Chen, and Yanxiang He. 2024. BMSE: Blockchain-based multi-keyword searchable encryption for electronic medical records. Computer Standards & Interfaces 89, 000 (2024), 10. [117] Rui Song, Bin Xiao, Yubo Song, Songtao Guo, and Yuanyuan Yang. 2023. A survey of blockchain-based schemes for data sharing and exchange. IEEE Transactions on Big Data 9, 6 (2023), 1477–1495. [118] Samuel Sousa and Roman Kern. 2023. How to keep text private? A systematic review of deep learning methods for privacy-preserving natural language processing. Artificial Intelligence Review 56, 2 (2023), 1427–1492. [119] State Council of the People’s Republic of China. 2024. Regulations on the Administration of Network Data Security. https://www.gov.cn/zhengce/zhengceku/202409/content_6977767.htm [120] Clare S. Sullivan, Marilena Gemtou, Evangelos Anastasiou, and Spyros Fountas. 2024. Building trust: A systematic review of the drivers and barriers of agricultural data sharing. Smart Agricultural Technology 8 (2024), 100477. [121] Lixue Sun, Chunxiang Xu, and Fugeng Zeng. 2024. Verifiable and hybrid attribute-based proxy re-encryption for flexible data sharing in cloud storage. J. Parallel and Distrib. Comput. 193 (2024), 104956. [122] Zuowen Tan, Yanliang Chen, Mengjiang Yu, Jintao Jiao, and Faxin Cao. 2024. Secure Data Sharing Scheme Based on Dual Attribute Conversion for Cloud-Assisted IoT. IEEE Internet of Things Journal 11, 20 (2024), 15. J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018. 111:34 Yongyang Lv, Xiaohong Li, Ruitao Feng, Xinyu Li, Guangdong Bai, Leo Zhang, Lili Quan, and Willy Susilo 

[123] G. A Thushara and S. Mary Saira Bhanu. 2025. Chebyshev chaotic map with attribute based encryption on session based data-sharing in fog environment. Peer-to-Peer Networking and Applications 18, 1 (2025), 1–25. [124] Venkatesh Upadrista, S. Nazir, and H. Tianfield. 2023. Secure data sharing with blockchain for remote health monitoring applications: a review. Journal of Reliable Intelligent Environments 9 (2023), 1 – 20. [125] S. Velmurugan, M. Prakash, S. Neelakandan, and Arun Radhakrishnan. 2024. Provably secure data selective sharing scheme with cloud-based decentralized trust management systems. Journal of Cloud Computing 13, 1 (2024), 86. [126] Bo Wang, Rong Jiang, Xuetao Pu, and Hejiao Zhang. 2025. An on-chain and off-chain collaborative data sharing and access control model for electronic medical records. The Journal of Supercomputing 81, 2 (2025), 1–26. [127] Fengqun Wang, Jie Cui, Qingyang Zhang, Debiao He, Chengjie Gu, and Hong Zhong. 2024. Lightweight and Secure Data Sharing Based on Proxy Re-Encryption for Blockchain-Enabled Industrial Internet of Things. IEEE Internet of Things Journal 11, 8 (2024), 12. [128] Haijiang Wang, Jianting Ning, Wei Wu, Chao Lin, and Kai Zhang. 2025. KA 22SE: Key-Aggregation Authorized Searchable Encryption Scheme for Data Sharing in Wireless Sensor Networks. IEEE Transactions on Services Computing 

18, 1 (2025), 226–238. [129] Lili Wang, Ye Lin, Ting Yao, Hu Xiong, and Kaitai Liang. 2023. FABRIC: Fast and Secure Unbounded Cross-System Encrypted Data Sharing in Cloud Computing. Dependable and Secure Computing 20, 6 (2023), 13. [130] Mingyue Wang, Zizhuo Chen, Yinbin Miao, Hejiao Huang, Cong Wang, and Xiaohua Jia. 2024. Cross-User Leakage Mitigation for Authorized Multi-User Encrypted Data Sharing. IEEE transactions on information forensics and security 

19 (2024), 19. [131] Taochun Wang, Qingshan Wu, Jian Chen, Fulong Chen, Dong Xie, and Huimin Shen. 2024. Health data security sharing method based on hybrid blockchain. Future Gener. Comput. Syst. 153, C (April 2024), 251–261. [132] Zeguo Wang, Muxi Zheng, Jiawei Wu, Kai Wen, Shijie Wei, and Gui-Lu Long. 2025. Reducing quantum resources for attacking S-AES on quantum devices. npj Quantum Information 11, 1 (2025), 157. [133] WangFengqun, CuiJie, ZhangQingyang, HeDebiao, and ZhongHong. 2024. Blockchain-Based Secure Cross-Domain Data Sharing for Edge-Assisted Industrial Internet of Things. IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security 

19 (2024), 3892–3905. [134] WangWei, LiuDongli, XuPeng, Yang Laurence Tianruo, and LiangKaitai. 2023. Keyword Search Shareable Encryption for Fast and Secure Data Replication. IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security 18 (2023), 5537–5552. [135] Jian Weng and Yunlei Zhao. 2011. Direct constructions of bidirectional proxy re-encryption with alleviated trust in proxy. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Paper 2011/208, 27 pages. [136] Liqiang Wu, Shaojing Fu, Yuchuan Luo, Hongyang Yan, Heyuan Shi, and Ming Xu. 2024. A Robust and Lightweight Privacy-Preserving Data Aggregation Scheme for Smart Grid. IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing 

21, 1 (2024), 270–283. [137] Zigang Wu, Haijiang Wang, Jian Wan, Lei Zhang, and Jie Huang. 2024. An Inner Product Predicate-Based Medical Data-Sharing and Privacy Protection System. IEEE Access 12 (2024), 12. [138] Qi Xia, Isaac Amankona Obiri, Jianbin Gao, Hu Xia, Xiaosong Zhang, Kwame Omono Asamoah, and Sandro Amofa. 2024. PRIDN: A Privacy Preserving Data Sharing on Named Data Networking. IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security 19 (2024), 677–692. [139] Qingqing Xie, Fatong Zhu, and Xia Feng. 2024. Blockchain-enabled data sharing for IoT: A lightweight, secure and searchable scheme. Journal of systems architecture 154 (2024), 154. [140] Guangxia Xu, Yuling Huang, and Chuang Ma. 2023. Attribute-based Searchable Proxy Re-encryption Blockchain Data Sharing Scheme. In 2023 IEEE 12th International Conference on Cloud Networking (CloudNet) . IEEE, Hoboken, NJ, USA, 372–380. [141] Guangquan Xu, Chen Qi, Wenyu Dong, Lixiao Gong, Shaoying Liu, Si Chen, Jian Liu, and Xi Zheng. 2023. A Privacy-Preserving Medical Data Sharing Scheme Based on Blockchain. Journal on Biomedical and Health Informatics (J-BHI) 

27, 2 (2023), 12. [142] Guowen Xu, Shengmin Xu, Jinhua Ma, Jianting Ning, and Xinyi Huang. 2023. An Adaptively Secure and Efficient Data Sharing System for Dynamic User Groups in Cloud. IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security 18 (2023), 5171–5185. [143] Lei Xu, Shifeng Sun, Xingliang Yuan, Joseph K. Liu, Cong Zuo, and Xu Chungen. 2019. Enabling Authorized Encrypted Search for Multi-Authority Medical Databases. IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computing 9 (2019), 1–1. [144] Shiyuan Xu, Xue Chen, Yu Guo, Yuer Yang, Shengling Wang, Siu-Ming Yiu, and Xiuzhen Cheng. 2025. Lattice-based forward secure multi-user authenticated searchable encryption for cloud storage systems. IEEE Trans. Comput. 74 (2025), 1663–1677. [145] Shujiang Xu, Shishi Dong, Lianhai Wang, Miodrag J. Mihaljevié, Shuhui Zhang, Wei Shao, and Qizheng Wang. 2025. Blockchain-based secure data sharing with overlapping clustering and searchable encryption. Computer Standards & Interfaces 93 (2025), 103979. J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018. Privacy-Enhancing Encryption in Data Sharing: A Survey on Security, Performance and Functionality 111:35 

[146] Zonglian Xu, Yu Su, Yuhe Qiu, and Ruidong Chen. 2022. Achieving Secure Dynamic Searchable Symmetric Encryption for Data Sharing Services via Blockchain. In CAIBDA 2022; 2nd International Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Big Data and Algorithms . IEEE, Nanjing, China, 1–6. [147] Lingyan Xue, Haiping Huang, Fu Xiao, Qi Li, and Zhiwei Wang. 2025. A Privacy-Enhanced Traceable Anonymous Transaction Scheme for Blockchain. IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security 20 (2025), 1176–1191. [148] Huan Yan and Yong Li. 2025. Generative AI for Intelligent Transportation Systems: Road Transportation Perspective. 

Comput. Surveys 57 (2025), 1–45. [149] Guangcan Yang, Peixuan Li, Yang Xin, Yunhua He, Chao Wang, and Xiubo Chen. 2024. An efficient hierarchical attribute-based encryption scheme with cross-domain data sharing. Computer Networks 255 (2024), 110863. [150] Ningbin Yang, Chunming Tang, Quan Zhou, and Debiao He. 2023. Dynamic Consensus Committee-Based for Secure Data Sharing With Authorized Multi-Receiver Searchable Encryption. IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security 18 (2023), 5186–5199. [151] Nan Yang, Youliang Tian, and Qijia Zhou, Zhou Zhang. 2023. A provably secure collusion-resistant identity-based proxy re-encryption scheme based on NTRU. Journal of information security and applications 78, Nov. (2023), 1.1–1.6. [152] Xiaohui Yang and Liangshun Li. 2024. BPPKS: A blockchain-based privacy preserving and keyword-searchable scheme for medical data sharing. Peer-to-Peer Networking & Applications 17, 6 (2024), 4033–4048. [153] Xiaohui Yang and Jing Liu. 2024. HA-Med: A Blockchain-Based Solution for Sharing Medical Data with Hidden Policies and Attributes. IET Information Security 2024 (2024), 14. [154] Xiaohui Yang and Chenshuo Zhang. 2022. Blockchain-Based Multiple Authorities Attribute-Based Encryption for EHR Access Control Scheme. Applied Sciences 12, 21 (2022), 10812. [155] Xiaohui Yang, Kun Zhang, Kai Jia, and Peiyin Zhao. 2024. A personalized and efficient EMR sharing and management scheme based on smart contracts. Peer-to-Peer Networking & Applications 17, 3 (2024), 1569–1587. [156] Lisha Yao, Jian Weng, Pengfei Wu, Shixin Chen, Jianfei Sun, Guomin Yang, and Rebert H. Deng. 2025. Breaking the Trilemma: Toward Efficient, Privacy-Preserving, and Forward-Secure Data Sharing in the Post-Quantum Era. IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security 20 (2025), 13370–13385. [157] Shimao Yao, Ralph Voltaire J. Dayot, In-Ho Ra, Liya Xu, Zhuolin Mei, and Jiaoli Shi. 2023. An Identity-Based Proxy Re-Encryption Scheme With Single-Hop Conditional Delegation and Multi-Hop Ciphertext Evolution for Secure Cloud Data Sharing. IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security 18 (2023), 3833–3848. [158] Yufeng Yao, Jinyong Chang, and Anling Zhang. 2024. Efficient Data Sharing Scheme With Fine-Grained Access Control and Integrity Auditing in Terminal–Edge–Cloud Network. IEEE Internet of Things Journal 11, 16 (2024), 26944–26954. [159] Lo Yao Yeh, Wan Hsin Hsu, and Chih Ya Shen. 2024. GDPR-Compliant Personal Health Record Sharing Mechanism With Redactable Blockchain and Revocable IPFS. Dependable and Secure Computing 21, 4 (2024), 15. [160] Hongjian Yin, Yiming Zhao, Lei Zhang, Baojun Qiao, Wenbo Chen, and Huaqing Wang. 2024. Attribute-based searchable encryption with decentralized key management for healthcare data sharing. Journal of systems architecture 

148 (2024), 103081. [161] Jiayuan Zhang, Rongxin Guo, Yifan Shi, and Wanting Tang. 2024. An anti-impersonation attack electronic health record sharing scheme based on proxy re-encryption and blockchain. Mathematical Biosciences & Engineering 21, 6 (2024), 6167–6189. [162] Jing Zhang, Shuangshuang Su, Hong Zhong, Jie Cui, and Debiao He. 2023. Identity-based broadcast proxy re-encryption for flexible data sharing in VANETs. IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security 18 (2023), 4830–4842. [163] Kai Zhang, Xiwen Wang, Jianting Ning, and Xinyi Huang. 2023. Dual-Server Boolean Data Retrieval for Highly-Scalable Secure File Sharing Services. IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security 18 (2023), 449–462. [164] Kai Zhang, M. Wen, R. Lu, and Kefei Chen. 2021. Multi-Client Sub-Linear Boolean Keyword Searching for Encrypted Cloud Storage with Owner-Enforced Authorization. IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing 18 (2021), 2875–2887. [165] Kai Zhang, Yan Zhang, Yanping Li, Ximeng Liu, and Laifeng Lu. 2024. A Blockchain-Based Anonymous Attribute-Based Searchable Encryption Scheme for Data Sharing. IEEE Internet of Things Journal 11, 1 (2024), 1685–1697. [166] Xiaojun Zhang, Yao Tang, Sheng Cao, Chao Huang, and Shuang Zheng. 2020. Enabling identity-based authorized encrypted diagnostic data sharing for cloud-assisted E-health information systems. Journal of Information Security and Applications 54, 3 (2020), 102568. [167] Zetian Zhang, Jingyu Wang, Lixin Liu, Yongfeng Li, Yun Hao, and Hanqing Yang. 2024. Anonymous data sharing scheme for resource-constrained internet of things environments. Ad Hoc Networks 163 (2024), 103588. [168] Feixiang Zhao, Jian Weng, Wenli Xie, Ming Li, and Jiasi Weng. 2024. HRA-secure attribute-based threshold proxy re-encryption from lattices. Information science 655, 000 (2024), 16. J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018. 111:36 Yongyang Lv, Xiaohong Li, Ruitao Feng, Xinyu Li, Guangdong Bai, Leo Zhang, Lili Quan, and Willy Susilo 

[169] Jing Zhao and Qianqian Su. 2024. A threshold traceable delegation authorization scheme for data sharing in healthcare. 

Computers & Security 139 (2024), 103686. [170] Jun Zhao, Kai Zhang, Junqing Gong, and Haifeng Qian. 2024. Lavida: Large-Universe, Verifiable, and Dynamic Fine-Grained Access Control for E-Health Cloud. IEEE transactions on information forensics and security 19 (2024), 19. [171] You Zhao, Ye Song, Weiyi Song, and Juyan Li. 2025. OO-IB-MPRE: A Post-Quantum Secure Online/Offline Identity-Based Matchmaking Proxy Re-Encryption Scheme for Exercise Physiology Data. Mathematics 13, 24 (2025), 4004. [172] ZhaoXiaolong and HuangZhenjie. 2024. Fully outsourced and fully verifiable attribute-based encryption for cloud data sharing. Cluster Computing 27 (2024), 10437–10453. [173] Rang Zhou, Yongkang He, Wanpeng Li, Yanping Wang, and Xiaojun Zhang. 2025. Subversion-resistant public-key searchable encryption for data sharing in IIoT. Journal of Systems Architecture 161 (2025), 103370. [174] Yuanjian Zhou, Zhenfu Cao, Xiaolei Dong, and Jun Zhou. 2023. BLDSS: A Blockchain-Based Lightweight Searchable Data Sharing Scheme in Vehicular Social Networks. IEEE Internet of Things Journal 10, 9 (2023), 7974–7992. [175] Yuyang Zhou, Liang Zhao, Yuqiao Jin, and Fagen Li. 2022. Backdoor-resistant identity-based proxy re-encryption for cloud-assisted wireless body area networks. Information Sciences: An International Journal 604, 604- (2022), 604. [176] Dexin Zhu, Yu Sun, Nianfeng Li, Lijun Song, and Jun Zheng. 2024. Secure electronic medical records sharing scheme based on blockchain and quantum key. Cluster Computing 27, 3 (2024), 3037–3054. J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018.