Title: SprayCheck: Finding Gray Failures in Adaptive Routing Networks

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.03702v1

Published Time: Wed, 06 May 2026 01:12:14 GMT

Number of Pages: 19

Markdown Content:
# SprayCheck: Finding Gray Failures in Adaptive Routing Networks 

## Jakob Krebs 

## Technion 

## Daniel Amir 

## Technion 

## Shir Landau Feibish 

## University of Haifa 

## Mark Silberstein 

## Technion/NVIDIA 

## Abstract 

Distributed machine learning (ML) training has become a dominant workload in modern data center networks, operat-ing at massive scale with clusters comprising tens to hundreds of thousands of GPUs. The scale of these networks makes failures, and particularly gray failures, inevitable. Gray fail-ures can significantly degrade both network and application performance, yet they are notoriously difficult to detect, lo-calize, and debug. To meet the performance demands of ML workloads, adaptive routing is widely deployed to maximize network utilization by dynamically spreading traffic across many paths. While adaptive routing increases network utiliza-tion, it also greatly intensifies the effect of gray failures. Prior work has either dismissed gray failures as negligible or pro-posed detection mechanisms that fail to scale, rendering these approaches increasingly impractical for large-scale clusters. We present SprayCheck , a passive gray failure detection system that leverages the statistical properties of adaptive rout-ing and network load balancing. By combining these prop-erties with flow-level information, SprayCheck can identify failures before they significantly impact application perfor-mance, enabling preemptive rerouting and improving overall performance. Importantly, this is achieved through passive observation of traffic spraying, without introducing additional load on the network. We evaluate SprayCheck and show that it can detect and localize a single-link packet-drop-rate 1.5% within a single iteration and as little as 0.5% within 5 training iterations of Llama-3 70B in a 64 spine topology. 

## 1 Introduction 

Distributed ML training has emerged as the dominant data center workload, justifying dedicated computing facilities. Servers, the network, and even the buildings themselves are purpose-built for the specific demands of training frontier models. Cluster networks now connect tens, or even hundreds of thousands of GPUs [46, 48, 50], and comprise tens of thou-sands of switches and hundreds of thousands of links. At this unprecedented scale, failures are inevitable. Of particular concern are gray failures , faults which evade traditional detection and localization at their source [23]. Paths experiencing a gray failure silently drop a portion of traversing packets while appearing to the control plane to be in working order [52]. Gray failures may arise from a variety of causes, such as contaminated fiber connectors causing ele-vated bit-error rates (BER), failing optical transceivers, or bit flips in switch packet buffers [20,61]. In some cases, errors in switch logic only affect packets traversing specific paths, or only appear under particular load scenarios [21]. While rare, when these failures do occur, they can persist indefinitely. The unique requirements of ML training have led to the broad deployment of specialized transport and load balancing techniques, such as in-network adaptive routing (AR) [44,49], to support the near-100% utilization seen during network collectives. AR employs load-dependent packet spraying in uplink switches [10, 25, 29, 49], distributing traffic evenly across the network fabric at the granularity of individual pack-ets, and thus avoids ECMP collisions emerging due to low flow entropy of ML network workloads [3, 16]. As a result, AR has been broadly deployed in large-scale ML training clusters [10, 11, 25, 39, 43, 48]. However, while AR ensures high network utilization, it amplifies the impact of gray failures: as packets are sprayed over all valid paths by the switch, any flow that has a valid path through a faulty link is likely to traverse it, meaning that even a single failure can affect multiple flows. Affected flows suffer from packet drops and subsequent time-consuming re-transmissions, causing delays that rapidly propagate through the entire training cluster due to the bulk-synchronous na-ture of ML training [33]. Since gray failures stay undetected, every collective iteration will be affected. To visualize the scale of the problem, Fig. 1 shows the slowdown of an AllReduce collective due to packet drops on a leaf-spine link in a 2-level fat tree topology without redundant links. A single link with a gray failure inducing 3% packet loss, i.e., only 0.375% of packets in an affected sprayed flow, is sufficient to cause the 99th percentile collective completion time to be 14.7% slower than without failures. 1      

> arXiv:2605.03702v1 [cs.NI] 5 May 2026 0123456
> Packet Drop Rate on Single Link [%]
> 0
> 50
> 100
> CCT Slowdown [%]
> Mean (1GiB)
> P99 (1GiB)

Figure 1: AllReduce collective completion time (CCT) slow-down relative to failure-free network. 8 Spines; 1GiB collec-tive size between 8 ranks. [Simulation] Traditional fault tolerance mechanisms can rapidly miti-gate detected failures [28] by rerouting traffic, thus preventing further usage of affected paths. However, on their own, these mechanisms are ineffective against gray failures. Since gray failures are invisible to the control plane, specialized mecha-nisms are required to detect and localize them as soon as they occur to allow the use of rapid-mitigation mechanisms. 

Existing approaches to gray failure detection have funda-mental weaknesses in the context of AR networks running ML training workloads. Path probing techniques [21, 35, 52] would be too costly and potentially ineffective. They detect gray failures by sending probing packets, but given low drop rates of gray failures, the volume of probes needed to detect them would add substantial network load. Moreover, probes might not even experience a failure that affects application packets, as they differ in size and structure, and traverse the fabric under different network conditions. End-host monitor-ing [45] requires controlling the packet path, which is not possible in switch-based AR. In-Network Telemetry tech-niques [18] have scalability constraints as they require col-lecting detailed per-packet state from switches to a central location [2, 26]. 

Our approach , which we call SprayCheck , is driven by the following observations: First, in a symmetric failure-free network, AR results in a symmetric spraying pattern. In the absence of gray failures, this predictable pattern means that for each flow, the same number of packets traverse each possible path in expectation. Second, ML training traffic is composed of large flows, ensuring that each flow’s true spraying behavior closely approximates this expectation. By counting how many packets of a given flow arrive from each spine switch, a destination leaf switch can determine whether the expected even distribution remains intact, or if some paths suffered packet drops due to a gray failure. By comparing affected paths, failures can be rapidly localized and mitigated, even in cases with multiple parallel gray failures (§3.6). This strategy addresses the weaknesses of existing ap-proaches. By leveraging intrinsic properties of AR, switches use the application traffic directly to detect gray failures, with-out adding any load to the network. By measuring within the network, path information is still available, allowing failures to be localized. And by using a simple signal, verified directly within switches, failures can be rapidly detected and mitigated without large centralized data collection overheads. In practice, massive training networks are bound to contain preexisting failures and permanently disabled fabric links, which render them asymmetric [30, 42]. This asymmetry greatly complicates the predictability of spraying patterns, which now depend not only on the specific sources and desti-nations of each flow, but also on their relative timing . How-ever, even under asymmetry, the spraying distribution of a single flow sent in isolation is still easily predictable, given the network connectivity is already available in the switch’s routing tables. We show that flow isolation, and predictable spraying behavior, can be recovered with minimal perfor-mance impact by using prioritization. Each source leaf switch selects a single flow at a time for measurement, and prioritizes that flow’s packets above all others. This elevated prioriti-zation is applied only during spraying, sufficient to ensure that the selected flow exhibits predictable spraying behavior (§3.2). At the same time, only a small portion of the total traffic originating from the leaf switch is prioritized, making performance impacts negligible (§5.6). SprayCheck operates entirely within switches, combining line-rate data-plane measurements and lightweight control-plane logic. It adds no additional load to the network, requires no coordination between switches and only minimal applica-tion support (sending total flow sizes at the beginning of a collective), and enables precise failure localization. We implement SprayCheck in Tofino switches and evaluate it in our testbed with a full 2-level fat tree fabric using switch-based adaptive routing and ConnectX-6 DX NVIDIA NICs. We also implement it in an NS-3 packet-level simulation to demonstrate SprayCheck’s efficiency at larger scale. Our evaluation is based on real network collectives executed using the UCC collective library [53]. For a network with 64 spines, SprayCheck detects gray failures resulting in a 1.5% loss rate with perfect accuracy within a single training iteration of Llama-3 70B [17], and a 0.5% loss rate within 5 iterations (§5.3). The detection covers all paths used by the application, is robust to network noise caused by competing flows or congestion control, and can even detect multiple parallel gray failures (§5.4). Specifically, we make the following contributions: • A passive, coordination-free detector for gray failures in packet spraying networks. • An algorithmic localization system that isolates the failed component to an individual link. • An implementation on Intel Tofino switches with full testbed integration, demonstrated to detect failures during replay of training collectives to show real-world suitability. This work extends a previous workshop submission [31]. 22 Background and Motivation 

The design of SprayCheck is motivated by several trends that have emerged in ML training networks. 

ML Training Communication. Distributed ML training is a highly structured, bulk-synchronous workload. Nodes alternate between periods of computation and periods of co-ordinated communication in the form of network collectives. This structure makes ML training highly susceptible to net-work delays: a single delayed flow stalls the subsequent com-putation at the destination node, which rapidly propagates to the entire training cluster during subsequent network collec-tives. As a result, even seemingly minor gray failures can have large impacts on end-to-end training performance, as shown in Fig. 1. The network collectives themselves rapidly saturate the network using only a small number of multi-GiB flows. This makes it extremely enticing to use flow-level measurements of application traffic to detect gray failures, rather than separate probing traffic. Not only does this pre-vent adding additional load to an already-saturated network, it has only minor overhead in switches since little state is needed to maintain statistics for a small number of flows. Training clusters commonly use RoCEv2 RDMA as transport protocol. While there are lossy modes for RoCE, lossless versions are preferred [14]. Therefore, every packet drop in the network is considered a network failure. 

Adaptive Routing. Since ML training traffic is composed of relatively few flows, traditional flow-level load balancing suffers heavily from flow collisions, leading to poor perfor-mance [14]. Instead, many operators have turned to Adaptive Routing (AR), in which switches forward or spray packets from a single flow across all available upstream paths towards the destination [10]. Switches may forward packets randomly across upstream paths [13], or employ more sophisticated strategies such as selecting the least congested port [16]. AR in non-blocking Clos topologies achieves near-optimal performance with low latency under high demand [4, 16, 29, 38]. It has therefore long been the design choice for Infini-band networks [55], and is increasingly deployed in Ethernet backend networks by NVIDIA [11,43], Cisco [25], and Broad-com [27]. When it comes to network faults, however, AR is a double-edged sword: any flow with a path across a link experiencing a gray failure will be affected, so a single failure is likely to affect many flows. This increases the need for reliable gray failure detection in ML networks which use AR. Because AR techniques prevent end-hosts from learning or influencing the specific path taken by each packet, failure detection in these networks must be conducted using informa-tion gathered by switches, instead of by end hosts. 

2LFT flat topologies in large-scale ML clusters. The capacity of modern switches is struggling to meet the demand for high-radix, high-throughput switches. Multi plane topolo-gies consisting of multiple parallel flat networks (planes) with higher radix switches but lower per-port bandwidth are emerg-2950 3000 3050 3100 3150 3200 3250 3300 

> Packets per Spine
> 0.00
> 0.01
> 0.02
> 0.03
> Probability density  JSQ
> JSQ(2)
> Quantized AR
> Random

Figure 2: Distributions for AR spraying strategies: JSQ: Join Shortest Queue, JSQ(2): Power of Two Choices [38], Quan-tized Adaptive Routing [36], and random. 100 K packet flow sprayed across 32 spines. μ = 100 k 

> 32

= 3125 [Simulation] ing as the dominant solution to the scaling problem [12, 54]. To achieve the same bandwidth as the low-radix topology, operators use multiple, parallel network planes [22]. Because of this trend, which allows scaling 2-level topologies to 131 k

GPUs with current switches [9], we focus SprayCheck on flat, 

2-level Fat Tree topologies .Despite the smaller size of each plane, the overall network still consists of a large number of links and switches, meaning that components are frequently taken down for maintenance or due to previously detected failures. The asymmetry in such networks is a steady state, not an exception [30]. 

Opportunity: Predictability of Adaptive Routing. 

There are many sources of non-determinism in networked systems, making it impossible to predict the path of an in-dividual packet in AR networks. However, when aggregat-ing over many packets, a predictable spraying distribution 

emerges which can be modeled. For a symmetric 2-level fat tree topology without failures, the symmetry of the network results in even spraying in expectation. In other words, an equal number of packets are expected to be received at the destination leaf switch from each spine. In practice, some variance from this ideal distribution should be expected. Fig. 2 shows observed packet spray-ing behavior for several different AR policies. "Random" sprays each packet via a random spine, while Joint Short-est Queue (JSQ) always sprays via the shortest queue. In-between, JSQ(2) selects two random queues and sprays via the shorter, also known as "power of two choices" [38], while Quantized AR sorts queues into buckets based on their current length and selects a queue from the shortest bucket [36]. For all policies, the observed packets per spine follows a Gaussian distribution around the expected value for even spraying. As more packets are sampled, the Gaussian distribution becomes tighter around the expectation. When a gray failure appears in the network, some packets will be dropped along paths containing the failure. This results in fewer packets than expected arriving at the destination leaf switch from the corresponding spine. Once enough packets are sampled, standard statistical hypothesis tests can be used to determine if a given spine is a part of a healthy path, or if a gray failure is causing packet drops. 3A:33.3%                            

> B:16.3%
> A: 0%
> B:50.1%
> A:33.3%
> B:16.3%
> A:33.3%
> B:16.3%
> S1 S2 S3 S4
> L1 L2 L3 L4
> AABB(a) Flows A and B fully overlap. A:33.3%
> B:19.1%
> A: 0%
> B:42.7%
> A:33.3%
> B:19.1%
> A:33.3%
> B:19.1%
> S1 S2 S3 S4
> L1 L2 L3 L4
> AABB
> (b) Flow A partially overlaps with flow B. S1 S2 S3 S4
> L1 L2 L3 L4
> AABB
> A:33.3%
> B:25.0%
> A: 0%
> B:25.0%
> A:33.3%
> B:25.0%
> A:33.3%
> B:25.0%
> (c) Flow B prioritized.

Figure 3: Asymmetric topology using JSQ(2) spraying. Flow A is sprayed across spines 1,3,4 while flow B is sprayed over all spines. Flow B’s spraying distribution depends on its timing relative to flow A unless it is prioritized. [Simulation] Takeaway: AR results in a predictable, even spraying distribution for all analyzed load balancing strategies. If the destination leaf switch observes fewer packets from one spine, this implies the presence of a gray failure. 

## 3 Design 

SprayCheck is a passive, low-overhead, in-network gray fail-ure detector that predicts the AR packet spraying distribution and compares it against runtime observations. To illustrate the reasoning behind the design, we first present a strawman for pristine, symmetric networks. We then show how network asymmetries break this approach, present the full SprayCheck design, and elaborate the core components in detail. 

## 3.1 Strawman Approach 

In a symmetric network, where all links are healthy and avail-able for AR, the source leaf switch sprays a flow evenly across all spines (as discussed in §2). In turn, the destination leaf switch receives the same number of flow packets from each spine. A gray failure on a single link reduces the number of packets the destination leaf receives from the spine connected to the failed link as the packets are dropped along the way. The failure detector can therefore count how many packets of the flow it receives from each upstream spine and check if it received fewer packets from one spine than from others. If so, it flags that upstream path as failed. While this approach works in symmetric networks, in real-ity, networks are asymmetric, either due to preexisting failures or maintenance. This results in an uneven spraying distribu-tion, breaking this approach as we illustrate next. Pure load imbalance can no longer serve as a failure signal. 

## 3.2 Adaptive Routing in Asymmetry 

Asymmetric topologies with competing flows make it hard to predict a flow’s spraying distribution when the flows only partially share the upstream links used for packet spraying. Fig. 3 shows three scenarios of two flows being sprayed from the same source (leaf L1) to different destination leaves. Both flows are the same size and are sprayed across partially overlapping sets of upstream paths. Fig. 3(a) shows that when both flows run at the same time, A is sprayed nearly equally, but flow B, which can use spine S2 exclusively, sends the majority of the traffic through S2. However, in Fig. 3(b), when starting flow B before A, flow B is sprayed more balanced, since it uses the entire network exclusively before flow A starts. We conclude that the packet spraying distribution in asymmetric networks with competing flows depends on the 

relative timing between the flows and is therefore largely unpredictable without knowing this timing. The strawman approach no longer works. There is however a way to restore equal spraying for flow B: 

network prioritization . Network switches implement different priority levels. Commonly, eight priority levels can be used for quality of service [24]. They are implemented as separate egress queue per priority level on each port. AR sprays the packets over the set of queues from the same priority level based on the aggregate queue length of all higher priorities. Meaning that if there is only a single flow with the highest priority during spraying, it will not be affected by competing flows and will spray packets as if it is the only flow in the network. Lower priority flows, however, are sprayed based on the queue lengths of the higher priority levels. Fig. 3(c) shows the distribution with flow B prioritized. It now is equally sprayed across all paths. Flow A also sprays equally in this case as all higher-priority queues are of the same length because B uses all paths in the network. Note that the actual load on the whole switch stays the same as before, keeping the conditions in which the flows pass through it intact, and only affecting the spraying distribution. Takeaway: In an asymmetric network, if a single flow is given the highest priority, the spraying pattern of that flow is not affected by concurrent traffic. SprayCheck resolves the challenge of competing traffic in asymmetric topologies by prioritizing a single cross-leaf mea-surement flow on each leaf switch (§3.4). SprayCheck then checks for network failures by testing runtime observations of how the prioritized flow is sprayed in the network against the analytical prediction on the destination leaf. For this, it calculates a detection threshold based on the flow information and its local routing table (§3.5). When the flow finishes, the switch compares its runtime counters. If a spraying path sees fewer packets than can be explained solely by the distribution of the load balancer, SprayCheck concludes that there must be a gray failure (§3.6). The selection of prioritized flows, per-formed by the source switches, changes over time to achieve high coverage of the fabric links. 

## 3.3 SprayCheck Overview 

We now provide an overview of SprayCheck’s systems com-ponents and their interactions as shown in Fig. 4. 41 

> Sender Receiver
> 2
> 5
> 7
> Source Leaf
> Spines:
> 4
> Dest. Leaf
> 3
> Count per spine
> Check for
> Failure
> Available Flows
> , …
> Prioritize
> Calc expected
> packets per spine
> Periodic
> Reset
> 6
> 8

Figure 4: SprayCheck Overview and Walkthrough. 

End Hosts: At the start of a collective, the collective library sends a flow announcement packet 1 to the flow’s destination. This packet contains the flow size and the destination queue pair (QP) numbers, which allows the network to identify this flow and its size. The packet’s overhead is negligible compared to the flow size (17 byte announcement per flow). The host starts the flow afterwards 4 . 

Source Leaf: Upon receiving the announcement, the source leaf marks the flow destination as available for its flow selec-tion policy 2 . It selects one cross-leaf flow at a time (§3.4), prioritizing its packets in that leaf only to isolate the spraying behavior 5 . Once the flow completes, the source leaf marks the destination switch as covered. The flow tracking and cov-erage map are periodically reset 7 to avoid stale information. 

Destination Leaf: This switch performs the core detection logic. Using the metadata from the announcement and lo-cal routing tables, it predicts the flow’s spraying behavior 3 and calculates a failure detection threshold (§3.5). As the flow runs, the switch counts the packets of that flow as re-ceived from each upstream port 6 . After the flow finishes the switch compares these measured counts to the threshold 8 and alerts the monitoring system if a failure is detected (§3.6). If more packets are needed to reach statistical significance, the measurements extend to additional flows. We now discuss our design in detail. 

## 3.4 Flow Selection and Isolation 

Each leaf switch selects a single outgoing (spine-bound) flow at a time for measurement, and prioritizes the packets of that flow at the highest priority in that switch (which is reserved ex-clusively for this purpose) to isolate its spraying distribution. Since this special prioritization is only needed to isolate spray-ing, it is only performed at the source leaf switch. Otherwise, all switches honor user-defined priority levels. A key question is how to select flows in a way that maxi-mizes the coverage of the fabric links. SprayCheck achieves this using a coordination-free flow selection strategy. Under SprayCheck, each source leaf uses a local round robin (RR) schedule across possible destination leaves to select the measurement destination. Once a given leaf is selected, the next flow destined to that leaf is selected for pri-oritization. This ensures that all used network paths reachable from this switch are covered, as packet spraying ensures that all the paths between every two leaves are explored. Because SprayCheck uses application packets for measure-ment, it can only cover a given destination leaf if a flow is actually sent to it. To avoid blocking indefinitely on flows that never arrive, leaf switches keep track of which destinations are used by the current application, and only include those destinations in the RR. SprayCheck accomplishes this by maintaining a bitmap of currently-reachable destinations at each leaf switch. When the switch observes a flow announce-ment packet, it marks the destination as reachable. To account for changing network traffic patterns, the control plane regu-larly resets the bitmap, ensuring that the flow selector does not get stuck due to stale information. 

## 3.5 Spraying Prediction 

SprayCheck detects gray failures by predicting the expected load balancing distribution of a flow and comparing runtime measurements to this expectation. Measurements that devi-ate sufficiently from this expected distribution indicate the presence of a gray failure. We now discuss how SprayCheck predicts the spraying distribution and calculates the detection threshold. 

Expected Per-Spine Load. Consider a single flow of N

packets from a source leaf switch to destination leaf switch, routed through k spine switches. Packets are sprayed across all k candidate spines, and each leaf-spine link carries, in expectation, λ = E[Xi] = N/k packets. Here, Xi is a random variable representing the observed number of packets arriving from a given spine at the leaf switch, assuming no gray fail-ures. Both N and k are known to the control plane: the flow size N is learned from the flow announcement, and k is the number of usable paths according to the local routing table. The variance of Xi around λ depends on the spraying policy. For purely random uniform spraying, each packet indepen-dently selects a spine, and Xi follows a binomial distribution with σ2 = Var [Xi] ≈ λ. Other policies are instead driven by queue occupancy, which tightens the distribution, lowering variance compared to the random baseline as shown in Fig. 2. Regardless of the spraying policy, for a large number of pack-ets sent during the same ML collective ( > 10 5 per flow), the distribution of Xi is normal due to the central limit theorem. 

Effect of a Gray Failure. A gray failure on the path via spine j that drops packets at rate p reduces the expected count from that spine to E[Xi | failure ] = λ · (1 − p), producing a 

deficit of pλ packets relative to the expected load. This deficit allows us to detect gray failures using standard statistical methods. Specifically, we use a one-sided Z-test, a standard hypothesis test for normal distributions. Our null hypothesis is a healthy path with a mean of λ, while our tested hypothesis is a lower mean due to a gray failure. 5Threshold Selection. Following the Z-test, we flag a fail-ure on the path via a given spine i whenever Xi, the number of packets observed arriving from spine i, is below a threshold 

t = λ − spN/k, where the parameter s determines the sen-sitivity. s can be chosen either analytically based on σ2 and the desired detection confidence, or by empirically checking which value results in the desired confidence on a given net-work (we use the latter approach for our evaluation; see §5.3). Because λ, s, N, and k are known to the switch at the begin-ning of each flow, the detection threshold can be determined immediately without the need for live network observations. 

Effect of Flow Size. The detectability of a failure having drop rate p depends on the ratio of the packet deficit on a spine to the noise of the load balancing algorithm. The deficit is pλ = pN /k, while for random spraying, the noise scales as 

σ ∼ √λ = pN/k, resulting in a signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of pλσ ≈ p pN/k. The SNR improves based on the number of packets per spine . In effect, larger flows produce tighter 

relative distributions around λ, making even small drop rates detectable. We quantify this relationship empirically in §5.3. 

Cross-flow Aggregation. When used to detect gray fail-ures with very low drop rates, or on networks with many spines, a single flow may not send a sufficient number of packets for SprayCheck to achieve high accuracy. In this case, data can be aggregated across multiple flows between the same source and destination leaf switches, for example across multiple collective iterations. This increases the number of packets N used for detection, strengthening the measurement signal and improving sensitivity. Due to the low number of flows (§2), the required in-switch state is small enough to re-tain flow statistics for aggregation within the switch’s memory limitations. 

## 3.6 Failure Detection and Localization 

After a leaf switch sees the last packet of a measured flow, identified by the maximum expected sequence number, it com-pares the per-spine packet counters to the detection threshold calculated for that flow. If it received too few packets from a given spine, then it notifies the network monitoring system that a failure has been detected on the path via that spine. SprayCheck localizes failures in the central monitoring system, which receives all failure notifications. While leaf switches may be able to localize some failures on their own, centralized localization has several advantages. On-switch localization is both workload-dependent and vulnerable to multiple failures shadowing each other, neither of which is a problem for centralized localization. At the same time, the monitoring system must be informed of failures regardless of where they are localized. Given the rarity of gray failures, as long as SprayCheck is configured to achieve high detection precision, the overhead of path-failure notifications is small. When the central monitor receives a failure report, it flags the entire path between the source and destination switch as S1 S2 S3 S4      

> L1 L2 L3 L4
> Flow A Flow A Flow B Flow B

Figure 5: Example Localization Mechanism. The link be-tween L2 and S2 , notated as L2S2 , failed. Measurement flow A and B detect the links {L1S2, L2S2 } and {L3S2, L2S2 }

as failed, respectively. The localization algorithm takes the intersection of all failure reports involving S2 and concludes that the link L2S2 failed. potentially failed. This path consists of two links: the uplink from the source leaf to the spine (link 1), and the downlink from the spine to the destination leaf (link 2). To determine which has failed, the central monitor waits for failure indica-tions from other flows. If link 1 has failed, then additional flows from the same source leaf to different destination leaves will report a failed path including link 1, and similar for link 2 and flows from different source leaves. In short, a link is considered failed when it is in the intersection of multiple failure reports that include a different leaf switch. Fig. 5 shows an example where the two flows, from L1 to 

L2 and from L2 to L3 , enable a failure to be localized. In this case, the link between L2 and S2 is failed. When checking all reports involving L2 , the localization algorithm correctly concludes that L2S2 failed. Since flows not involving L2 can still spray via S2 to L1 and L3 , the algorithm will not conclude that L1S2 or L3S2 have failed. 

Multiple Failures. Our localization algorithm is robust to situations with multiple parallel failures, localizing all fail-ures individually. There are three possible ways for failed links to be positioned relative to each other: (1) two failed links sharing the same spine (and connected to two different "victim" leaf switches), (2) two failed links sharing the same leaf, and (3) two failed links sharing neither leaf nor spine. In both the second and third case, both failures appear in disjoint sets of paths; since our algorithm localizes failures using path intersections, both failures will be localized independently. While the first case poses a risk of both failures shadowing each other, as long as there exist two flows which each in-volve a different victim leaf switch (not counting flows which involve both simultaneously), our algorithm will be able to identify both failures. 

## 4 Implementation 

To show the feasibility of in-network failure detection us-ing load imbalance as failure signal, we prototype Spray-Check using Intel P4 Studio [7] and Tofino-1 programmable switches [6]. This section presents each component’s imple-mentation. While we divide source and destination leaf for 6clarity, every leaf always fulfills both roles. We extend UCC [53], the collective communication library (CCL) of UCX [47], to send the flow announcement packet containing the flow identification and size. We believe that this functionality can be implemented in any other CCL. The implementation is oblivious to specific collective algorithms, as it only requires network flow information and is limited to an addition of 133 LoC in the UCC profiling subsystem to extract the flow size and send the packet to the flow’s destination. 

## 4.1 Source Switch 

The source switch data plane selects the measurement flow and isolates its spraying from competing flows. 

Flow Selection. Each leaf selects exactly one cross-leaf flow for measurement. To select a flow, the switch data plane parses the flow announcement packets to track which flows are available in the system, and maintains a bitmap of the destination switches to which flows are available. To maintain the round-robin policy of flow selection, the switch keeps another bit mask containing the history of destination switches it already covered. It then selects the flow to the lowest destination switch index which has not been recently selected and to which a flow is available. To ensure progress, the switch control plane resets the history bit mask and available flow mask regularly, e.g., every minute. After selecting the prioritized flow, the switch marks all packets of the flow as measurable for SprayCheck using the lowest bit in the first reserved block of the RoCE base transport header. 

Spraying Isolation. When the flow is selected by the selection policy, the switch assigns it to the highest priority queue. All packets arriving with user-defined priority levels below the maximum are assigned according to the defined level. We reserve the exclusive use of the highest priority in the network for SprayCheck. Users may use all other priority levels. The exclusive usage ensures that SprayCheck does not change the user-defined priority order. Limiting the prior-itization to the spraying switch minimizes the performance impact of using network priorities. Since the prioritized flow is sprayed across all upstream ports, the fraction it occupies on a single port is relatively small compared to the port’s overall capacity. If a prioritized flow is sprayed across 64 ports, only 1.56% of each port are used by the prioritized flow, leaving the remaining capacity for other traffic. We evaluate the impact in §5.6. 

## 4.2 Destination Switch 

The destination switch implements the detection mechanism of SprayCheck. It computes the detection threshold, counts the prioritized packets received per spine from each flow, compares the counters to the threshold, and alerts the network monitoring system when a failure is detected. 

Threshold Calculation. After receiving the flow an-nouncement packet, the data plane parses the packet contents into switch memory for the control plane to read and calculate the threshold according to §3.5. The threshold calculation cannot be implemented in the data plane because of the com-plex arithmetic operations required. We therefore resort to the control plane. We avoid packet parsing in the control plane because of security concerns. The control plane stores the per-spine threshold and the maximum expected packet sequence number (PSN) in data plane registers, indexed by the destination queue pair (QP). To avoid stale information, the control plane keeps a queue of QP numbers and erases their data plane state after a timeout of 1 minute, assuming that no flow will take longer to complete. 

Packet Counting. The data plane counts how many pack-ets marked as measurable it received from each source leaf via each spine. The switch keeps one 16-bit counter for each, accumulating to less than 2KB of memory in a 32-spine topol-ogy. The packets must be marked as measurable by the source leaf to be counted. While the marking does not actually priori-tize the packets, it allows the switch to specifically count only source-prioritized flows. The switch counts all marked pack-ets, regardless of if the threshold value is available in memory or not. This is necessary in order to account for reordering of the announcement packet and the threshold computation time. It stores the packet counts in a map indexed by the des-tination QP number and spine switch from which the packet was received. This allows the simultaneous measurement of flows from different sending leaves. The switch also stores the expected highest PSN as calculated from the flow size. When it sees this PSN, it stops counting and performs the failure detection. 

Detection. To detect failures, the switch compares the re-ceived per-spine packet number with the calculated threshold. If the counter is lower than the threshold it marks the packet path as failed in a failed-paths bitmap. The control plane reg-ularly reads the bitmap and notifies the network monitoring system about the detected failure. 

Sensitivity to packet reordering. The detection of the flow’s last packet may not be accurate due to packet reorder-ing. Packet spraying can result in reordering as the delays of different paths may not be identical. We show in §5.4 that a realistic amount of reordering is well below the level that may impact SprayCheck’s detection accuracy. 

## 5 Evaluation 

We evaluate SprayCheck’s detection quality, exhibiting how the accuracy depends on the network and workload, and its robustness to congestion control and concurrent network load. 7Failure Injector              

> C0 C7
> vSW0 vSW7 vSW8 vSW15
> Leaf SWs
> Spine SWs
> Tofino SW
> Physical Link VLAN Links
> SR-IOV
> Interfaces
> Server
> Application
> Containers
> …
> ……
> Connect x6 DX
> C0 C1 C7 C6
> vSW0 vSW7
> vSW8
> vSW1 vSW6
> vSW8 vSW14 vSW15
> Physical Topology Virtual Topology
> Application Containers
> Failure Injector
> …
> Collective Ring
> Tofino SW

Figure 6: Testbed Architecture. The virtual topology is im-plemented by multiplexing the Tofino switch into 16 virtual switches connected via VLANs. SprayCheck is implemented in the leaf vSwitches. 

## 5.1 Setup 

We evaluate SprayCheck both in a real-world testbed and with packet simulations. For small-scale experiments, we use our testbed, which emulates a full two-level fat tree topology with up to 8 spine switches. We use NS-3 [41] network simulations to evaluate SprayCheck in larger topologies. We confirm that the results from the testbed and from the simulation for the same-scale topologies are on par. 

Testbed. The left half of Fig. 6 depicts the physical topology of the testbed, which consists of two Intel Tofino-1 switches, one running multiple virtual switches and one inject-ing failures. We use the virtual switches to build the virtual topology shown in the right half of Fig. 6, a non-blocking two level fat tree with 8 leaves and 8 spines. This is the largest topology we could fit in a Tofino-1 switch. Each virtual link is implemented as an isolated VLAN on four shared physical links. Traffic is generated by containers running on a Linux server connected with a NVIDIA ConnectX-6 DX [8] NIC. The NIC exposes SR-IOV virtual functions (vNICs), one for each container. All vNICs use RDMA with DCQCN as con-gestion control, and support selective repeat loss recovery and out-of-order packet delivery, specifically enabled for these NICs by NVIDIA. As the testbed only serves for simulating the effects of spraying in a network, rather than absolute per-formance measurements, we believe it serves as a reliable proxy for estimating the behavior of a real system. We further describe the testbed setup and implementation in App. B. 

Packet Simulation. We use NS-3 [41] for network simu-lation with the Astra-SIM RDMA implementation [56]. We simulate non-blocking 2-level fat tree topologies connected with 100 Gb/s links. The topology is always full, so its size is determined by the number of spines, and denoted for each ex-periment. We extended the simulator to support out-of-order packet delivery and selective repeat (SR) loss recovery [37]. As in the testbed we use DCQCN [60] for congestion control. We use JSQ(2) (join shortest queue with random tie breaking) 0%           

> 2%
> 4%
> Slowdown  AllReduce CCT
> Failure injected
> SprayCheck detection
> Failure Recovered
> 0246810 12 14 16 18 20
> 0
> 1
> 2
> 3
> 4
> 5
> 6
> 7
> Upstream Spine
> Repetition
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Norm. Packet Rate

Figure 7: Failure detection when running 20 repetitions of AllReduce. Packet drop rate of 1% is injected on a single link before repetition 12 . Top: Relative slowdown of the col-lective completion time. Bottom: Packet arrival rate at each upstream port. The link to spine #1 is deliberately disabled. SprayCheck detects the failure immediately after the end of repetition 12 . The failure is not visible via packet rate teleme-try. [Testbed]. per-packet adaptive routing on all leaf switches. We run each simulation 20 times with different seeds for randomization. 

Workload. In both the testbed and simulation, we use a Ring-AllReduce workload of 2 GiB across 2 Queue Pairs per rank unless mentioned otherwise, resulting in a flow size of 1 GiB. We run one endpoint on each leaf switch; since Spray-Check’s failure detection is based on spraying distributions across spines, local traffic within a leaf is not considered and we omit it during experiments. 

Failure Injection. We inject failures by probabilistically dropping packets on a single fabric link. We do not inject failures on links between the switches and end hosts. 

## 5.2 End-to-end Evaluation 

We demonstrate the end-to-end use of SprayCheck with the following testbed experiment in Fig. 7. We run 20 repetitions of Ring-AllReduce, and inject a failure on a single link by set-ting its drop rate to 1% . In addition, the fabric is asymmetric with two links permanently taken down in the routing tables, one from the source leaf to spine 4, and from the measure-ment leaf to spine 1 (this link is visible as the empty row in the lower graph since it is fully disabled). In addition to each collective, we run a bisection flow at line-rate to the measure-ment switch to create background traffic. The bisection flow’s sender is placed under a different leaf and can use paths via all spines except spine 1 due to the disabled down link. Fig. 7 shows a failure injection before repetition 12 and SprayCheck detecting it immediately after the repetition. The injected failure causes a slowdown of the collective. During the failure, the per-port packet rates, measured from the desti-nation leaf’s data plane, do not exhibit any distinctive change. In contrast, SprayCheck successfully identifies the fault. 85.3 Calibration of Sensitivity and Accuracy 

Our goal is to detect failures that might induce slowdown on the performance of collectives as early as possible, while at the same time avoiding both false positives and false nega-tives. Setting a tight detection threshold (§3.5) increases the sensitivity to a lower drop rate, but can also decrease detec-tion accuracy due to inherent spraying variance. At the same time, to reduce the noise, more packets need to be counted in each measuring switch to achieve statistically significant results, thus potentially affecting more collectives longer. De-creasing the sensitivity with a more relaxed threshold would imply more significant degradation of a single iteration of a collective but more rapid and robust detection. Conceptually, we prefer to detect failures quickly and with the highest robustness. Thus, we seek to find the lowest drop rate with minimal effects on the system performance, which affords perfect detection accuracy, and can achieve this with a realistic number of packets to allow fast detection. More formally, we need to set two parameters of the detec-tor at deployment time: sensitivity s, which determines the percentage of drops per link we detect with perfect precision, and the minimum number of packets Pmin per flow per spine port necessary to count until reaching statistical significance. The calibration requires optimizing a Pareto frontier over 

s and Pmin to find their values that allow detecting a certain per-link failure rate with perfect accuracy of 100% TPR and 0% FPR. We take a simplified iterative approach instead: we first calibrate s with a large number of packets per spine, and then reduce the number of packets to find Pmin given s.To find s, we run the detector in the testbed with various injected drop rates, and record the respective packet distribu-tions. We use these to find the value for s that results in a perfect detection of the lowest possible drop rate by calculat-ing the respective Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curves. Now, given s, we run the detection with varying num-ber of packets per spine to find Pmin , reevaluating the ROC to ensure perfect detection accuracy. 

Calibration on the testbed. Fig. 8 presents ROC curves to find s. SprayCheck achieves perfect accuracy for drop rates 

≥ 0.4% on a single link in the 8-spine topology with 500 K

packets per spine. Fig. 9(a) shows the results. We observe that to achieve zero FNR and zero FPR (not shown), we set 

Pmin to 60k for detecting 0.5% per-link drop rate, 20k for 1% and 7k for 1.5%. 

Simulation vs. Testbed. The figure depicts the ROC curve produced by the same setup in the testbed and in the simula-tion. The slightly better results of the simulation compared to the testbed in Fig. 8 are caused by the approximate imple-mentation of the JSQ(2) load balancing in the testbed, which is more noisy than the exact queuing implementation of the simulation. However, sensitivity values for perfect detection accuracy are the same for both. This confirms that we can use simulation to extrapolate the results to larger topologies 0.0 0.5 1.0      

> False Positive Rate
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> True Positive Rate
> 0.05%
> 0.1%
> 0.2%
> ≥ 0.4%
> Random
> (a) [Simulation] 0.0 0.5 1.0
> False Positive Rate
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> True Positive Rate (b) [Testbed]

Figure 8: ROC Curves for different values of s. SprayCheck perfectly detects loss rate of ≥ 0.4% on a single link in an 8 spine topology, both in simulation and on the testbed with a 500 k packet measurement flow size 10 1 10 2 10 3 10 4 10 5         

> #Packets/Spine
> 0.0
> 0.5
> 1.0
> FNR  0.5%
> 1%
> 1.5%
> (a) Finding Pmin empirically in the testbed [Testbed] 816 32 64
> Number of spines
> 0.0
> 0.5
> 1.0
> FNR
> 7k Packets/Spine @ 1.5%
> 20k Packets/Spine @ 1%
> 60k Packets/Spine @ 0.5%
> (b) Precision for larger topologies with calibrated Pmin and s[Simula-tion]

Figure 9: Finding Pmin and validating its precision across mul-tiple topology sizes. (b) The FNR is 0 in all measurements. while using data obtained from the testbed. 

Extrapolating to larger topologies. To validate that these results hold for larger topologies, we run a simulation while using the parameters we found in the testbed, and measuring the resulting detection accuracy. Fig. 9 shows that we achieve the same accuracy across different number of spines. 

Time-to-detection in the context of model training. To understand the range of acceptable values for Pmin , recall that this number represents the portion of the packets received at the measuring switch from a certain flow that are forwarded through a single spine. Thus, from the user perspective, Pmin ·

Nspines is the number of packets that the application must send between the same source and destination switch to allow SprayCheck to successfully detect a fault on the path between them. Therefore, large topologies need proportionally more packets for detection. In the context of collectives, if this number is too high then more collectives are affected until the detection occurs, with higher application-visible impact. To understand the application impact of this detection delay, we compare the required Pmin for different topology sizes with the data sent by a single GPU during a training iteration in its AllReduce collectives. The collective sizes are based on train-ing a Llama-3 70B model with a typical training configuration (4TP/4PP/4DP, 16 μbatches, batch size 256) [17]. Tab. 1 shows the results. We observe that our values of Pmin 

are practical for large topologies and high sensitivity values. 9Loss Rate  

> kPackets Spine

Spines kPackets Flow Size [GiB] Iter. 2.0% 232 64 0.56 0.07 64 128 1.12 0.15 128 256 2.23 0.29 1.5% 732 224 1.95 0.26 64 448 3.91 0.51 128 896 7.81 1.02 1.0% 20 32 640 5.58 0.73 64 1, 280 11 .16 1.46 128 2, 560 22 .32 2.93 0.5% 60 32 1, 920 16 .74 2.19 64 3, 840 33 .48 4.39 128 7, 680 66 .96 8.78 

Table 1: Measurement collective sizes required to achieve suf-ficient packets per spine to detect a desired drop rate with per-fect precision. The last column indicates how many training iterations of Llama-3 70B are necessary to meet the required number of packets. For example, even the highest sensitivity of 0.5% dropped packets per link allows SprayCheck to detect a problem within 5 training iterations in a large 64-spine topology. 

## 5.4 Robustness 

We show that SprayCheck is robust to non-pristine network environments, considering simultaneous gray failures, pre-existing failures, competing traffic, network congestion, and packet reordering. 

Multiple Gray Failures. We observe no effect on the accuracy when injecting multiple simultaneous gray failures on up to 6% of links on paths between two leaves (4 out of 64 links in a 32 spine topology) (App. A). However, for an unrealistically large fraction of affected links (e.g. 2 out of 16 links on the testbed), the accuracy is reduced. The reason is that excessive retransmissions elevate the packet counters of some failed links above the detection threshold, causing false negatives. However, SprayCheck does not produce false positives as no healthy link falls below the detection threshold. 

Preexisting known failures. Larger networks are likely to have preexisting disabled links which are reflected in routing tables. These cause network asymmetry, reducing the num-ber of paths available for certain flows. Affected flows must spray more packets over each remaining path. As a result, increasing the number of preexisting failures improves de-tection accuracy. We observe in simulation that SprayCheck maintains its accuracy under preexisting failures (App. A). 

Network congestion. Using a testbed experiment, we observe that SprayCheck maintains its accuracy in face of congestion (App. A). While the congestion control algorithm (CCA) may reduce the sending rate of a flow, this does not Shorter Longer Partial       

> 0.00
> 0.25
> 0.50
> 0.75
> 1.00
> TNR
> 0.29 0.29
> 0.14
> No prioritization
> Prioritization
> (a) Jitter [Simulation] 20 40 60 80 100
> #Measurements
> 0
> 50
> 100
> Coverage[%]
> Random Permutation
> 32 Indep. Ring AllReduces
> Single Ring AllReduce (b) Coverage [Simulation]

Figure 10: (a) SprayCheck requires prioritization to be un-affected by jitter. 1% of links are assumed to be offline to create network asymmetry. (b)SprayCheck selects flows to all available destination leaf switches, achieving the maximum coverage allowed by the workload. change the switch’s spraying distribution if the flow is iso-lated for measurements by SprayCheck. Since SprayCheck aggregates packet counters over the lifetime of the flow, the detection is independent of the sending rate. Since Spray-Check accurately detects failures under congestion, it can operate in blocking networks. 

Jitter of Competing Traffic. As motivated in Fig. 3, the timing of competing traffic in an asymmetric network im-pacts the packet spraying distribution. However, as discussed in §3.2, prioritizing a flow during spraying restores the ex-pected balanced distribution. We confirm this behavior in simulation. Fig. 10(a) shows three scenarios of overlapping flows: First, a shorter flow both starts and completes while the measured flow is running. Second, the measured flow fully overlaps with a competing flow. Third, while the mea-sured flow is running, a competing flow starts and continues until after the measured flow completes. In all cases, without prioritization, the jitter between the two flows results in a low true negative rate (TNR), meaning that false positives are common. When the measurement flow is prioritized, there are no false positives in any case. 

Packet Reordering. Network reordering may result in a situation where the measurement flow’s last packet is not the final packet to traverse the destination leaf switch. Since the last packet causes the switch to stop counting, packets which arrive after the last packet will not be counted by SprayCheck. We experimentally confirm that under realistic conditions, the amount of reordering is too small to impact SprayCheck’s detection accuracy. While the theoretical maximum reorder-ing is approximately 7.5k packets 1, the amount of reordering in both simulations and the real world [36] is much smaller. In our worst-case simulation, two flows are sent from differ-ent source leaves to the same destination over 64 spines. To maximize reordering, we fully fail half of the uplinks such that each flow is sprayed via 31 non-overlapping spines, plus one single spine used by both flows. We observe a maximal reordering of 100 packets, far fewer than the > 100 k total packets needed for failure detection in this network.            

> 1 max. queuing delay packet pacing time . With 3 queues each with 10 MiB max. queue size:
> ⌈3·10 MiB
> 25 GB s
> ·((4096 +58 )BPacket
> 25 GB s
> )−1⌉=7,573 packets

10 5.5 Coverage 

SprayCheck’s flow selection policy aims to regularly check every path used by the current workload. Because Spray-Check uses application traffic to detect failures, it can only check paths used by the workload. Fig. 10(b) shows the per-centage of destination leaves covered from a given source leaf as it selects flows for measurement. For random permutation traffic, the source leaf rapidly covers all possible destinations, as flows are available to all of them. For the 32 independent Ring-AllReduce workload, rings are independently and ran-domly selected, meaning that not all destination leaves have flows available for measurement. Still, SprayCheck’s flow selection policy covers all available destinations. In the case of a single Ring-AllReduce, only one destination leaf switch is available. Nevertheless, because each leaf communicates with two different leaf switches, either as sender or receiver, failures can still be detected and localized. 

## 5.6 Impact on Application Performance 

SprayCheck prioritizes a single flow during spraying over all other spine-bound traffic in the source leaf. In a congested network, this may penalize competing flows. To show that the effect on performance is negligible, we simulate a 32-spine topology in which 16 identically sized cross leaf flows are sent from the same leaf. To create network congestion, we disable two upstream links from the sending leaf, corresponding to a 3% link failure rate in the entire cluster. Without prioritization, all flows are slowed equally. With a single prioritization, the prioritized flow speeds up by 0.2% and all other flows slow down by 0.25% relative to the non-prioritized scenario. The impact is low because each flow is sprayed across 30 paths, so the fraction of prioritized traffic on each path is at most 3.33% of line rate, too small to have end-to-end impact on competing traffic. 

## 6 Limitations and Future Work 

Weighted Packet Spraying. Some AR spraying strategies do not distribute packets equally across all paths. If packet-sprayed flows coexist with preexisting, non-packet-sprayed flows, even spraying may cause imbalanced load. Weighted packet spraying allows certain queues to be preferred for spraying [40], to counter this effect. If the weights are known by the receiving leaf, SprayCheck’s threshold calculation can use them. 

3-Level Topologies. SprayCheck focuses on 2-level topolo-gies as they are increasingly used for large-scale training clusters following multiplane designs (§2). SprayCheck can be extended to 3-level topologies, but the design gets more complicated. In a 3-level Fat Tree, there are two spraying decisions made: on the source leaf and on the upstream spine. SprayCheck requires a single flow to be prioritized during spraying, meaning that only a single measurement flow may leave from each pod, which requires coordination between the switches. For example, switches in a pod may pass a token to determine whose turn it is to prioritize a flow. 3-level topolo-gies also pose additional challenges to failure localization. We leave these challenges for future work. 

Detection of Access Link Faults. Access links, which connect end hosts to leaf switches, are used by all paths of a flow. As a result, SprayCheck’s approach, which measures what portion of a flow’s traffic traverses each possible path, is not applicable to these links. Instead, we sketch an extension to detect and localize gray failures on these links by counting the number of packets and NACK s observed during a flow. If a packet is lost on the receiver’s access link, it will have already passed through the destination leaf and counted by SprayCheck. The retransmitted packet will also be counted, meaning that by the end of the flow, the sum of all per-spine counters is larger than the expected number of packets for the flow. This clear signal indicates a failure somewhere between counting the packet at the destination leaf and delivery at the destination NIC, usually on the access link. If a packet is lost on the sending access link, it will not have been counted by the destination leaf yet. Only the retransmit-ted packets are counted, meaning that both the distribution and sum of per-spine counters will be as expected, which excludes failures in the fabric or destination access link. How-ever, the switch can still deduce the presence of a failure by counting the NACK s for a given flow. If the switch sees a large number of NACKs but excludes all other failures, it can conclude that the source access link must be failed. 

Lossy Fabrics. SprayCheck detects gray failures in loss-less networks through their resulting packet loss. In lossy fabrics, packet drops are normal and expected. SprayCheck does not currently distinguish expected loss from gray failures, requiring significant adaptation to support lossy fabrics. 

## 7 Discussion 

Application use of network priorities. Priorities are often used in networks. For example, MoE traffic may be priori-tized over DP-AllReduce due to its latency sensitivity [15,32]. While SprayCheck reserves the highest priority for spray-ing isolation, network operators may still use the remaining priority levels. Additionally, while a measured flow may be prioritized above another higher-priority traffic class, we show in §5.6 that the performance impact is low. 

Beyond Ring-AllReduce. We evaluate SprayCheck us-ing Ring-AllReduce collectives since these are typically the largest collectives performed on scale-out network, making it easy for SprayCheck to detect low-impact gray failures. How-ever, SprayCheck can detect failures using any sprayed flow 

as long as the length of the flow is known to the destination leaf switch. In the case of small flows, data from multiple flows can be aggregated to achieve a strong signal. 11 Security. We minimize SprayCheck’s attack surface by avoiding direct communications between application logic and control plane. Switches parse flow announcement packets in the data plane, isolating the control plane. In the worst case, an attacker can cause the control plane to perform the thresh-old computation on bogus values. Further, the leaf switches do not change any packet contents beyond the measurement marker, which can be reset in the destination switch, ensuring that application traffic remains untouched. 

Passive flow metadata extraction. SprayCheck’s imple-mentation requires a flow announcement packet informing the switches about the existing flows and their sizes. In principle, this information could be passively extracted from the existing traffic of the CCL, but we did not develop this capability. 

System Integration. SprayCheck detects not only gray failures but all packet drops in the system. The network monitoring system (NMS) can cross-reference SprayCheck’s reports with existing tooling to remove unnecessary alerts. After localizing a failure to a specific link, the NMS triggers a routing table update to mitigate the failure. A destination leaf switch alone is unable to localize the failure to a single link. However, it can still disable the entire faulty path locally. 

## 8 Related Work 

Gray Failures cause performance degradations with no in-dividual system component ceasing to work entirely [19, 20]. This makes them notoriously hard to detect [57]. Com-mon root-causes are partial hardware failures or firmware bugs [19, 51]. In networks specifically, packet buffer corrup-tion [20], high optical loss on fibers, or transceiver errors [61] can all cause packet loss which harms system performance but is not necessarily represented in switch counters [58]. 

Failure Detectors. Path Probing approaches exhaustively check all network paths for reachability and low packet loss. PingMesh [21] is a popular choice for data center networks due to the low overhead of ICMP probes. Net-Bouncer [52] uses source routing to control the probing path. R-PingMesh [34] extended PingMesh to test RDMA reacha-bility, latency, and throughput. SkeletonHunter [35] optimizes the probing schedule to only validate paths that are used by the sparse communication matrix of the ML training jobs in the cluster. SprayCheck, in contrast, uses application traffic for measurements without requiring additional probe packets. 

End-host detectors validate either application metrics, such as collective completion time, or individual flow met-rics [1, 45]. To isolate individual link failures, network-path information must be available at the end hosts, making the approaches fundamentally incompatible with packet spray-ing. SuperBench [57] tests end-to-end performance metrics to ensure the entire system performs within expectation. 

In-network Telemetry (INT) allows tracing of a packet’s path through the network and collecting switch statistics in the data plane. This allows the comparison of counters and time information across switches, allowing the detection of abnormal delays or inconsistencies in packet counters. How-ever, as gray failures are not necessarily represented in switch counters [58], they cannot be relied upon for detection. INT further introduces end host involvement [2, 18] and causes packet overheads, by either sending telemetry packets or in-troducing additional headers in application packets [18]. 

Control Plane Monitoring systems collect packet counters, bandwidth usage, switch configurations, and protocol state from the switch control plane [5] and check for anomalies. Control plane sampling relies on the correctness of switch counters, which cannot be taken for granted for gray fail-ures [58]. The low time resolution of control plane sampling prevents correlating counter values across switches with high precision, preventing the detection of small failures. 

Packet Spraying is commonly used for multi path routing in ML training clusters since a per-packet load balancing decision results in more equalized path usage and thereby avoids link congestion. Switch-based packet spraying decides the upstream path on each network switch. DRILL [16] uses a join-shortest-queue approximation [38] to balance packets equally across all paths. Since randomly sampling queues and comparing their lengths is expensive at line rate, quantized adaptive routing [29, 49] chooses the output queue randomly from all queues with a length under a given threshold. Switch-based approaches remove the possibility to corre-late a packet with a fixed network path, as was possible with ECMP. This allowed the application to change its path, e.g., to avoid congestion, by changing the flow-five tuple. REPS [3] reintroduced this possibility using a set of host-controlled entropy vectors (EVs) to control the per-packet path. If a specific EV experiences congestion or packet loss, it is not reused. This approach allows packet spraying whilst retaining the possibility to exclude faulty paths. It avoids the oblivious spraying widely deployed in adaptive routing that SprayCheck relies upon for failure detection. 

## 9 Conclusion 

We present SprayCheck, a gray failure detector for networks using adaptive routing. SprayCheck works by passively ana-lyzing the packet spraying distribution of application traffic and comparing it to an analytical prediction. For a network with 64 spines, SprayCheck detects a link with a 1.5% loss rate with perfect accuracy within a single training iteration of the Llama-3 70B model, and a 0.5% loss rate within 5 iterations. SprayCheck does not introduce network overhead, covers all paths used by the application, operates entirely within switches with minimal application support, is robust to network noise caused by competing flows or congestion control, and can detect multiple parallel gray failures. 12 References 

[1] Behnaz Arzani, Selim Ciraci, Luiz Chamon, Yibo Zhu, Hongqiang Harry Liu, Jitu Padhye, Boon Thau Loo, and Geoff Outhred. 007: Democratically finding the cause of packet drops. In 15th USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 18) , pages 419–435, 2018. [2] Ran Ben Basat, Sivaramakrishnan Ramanathan, Yuliang Li, Gianni Antichi, Minian Yu, and Michael Mitzen-macher. PINT: Probabilistic in-band network telemetry. In Proceedings of the Annual conference of the ACM Special Interest Group on Data Communication on the applications, technologies, architectures, and protocols for computer communication , pages 662–680, 2020. [3] Tommaso Bonato, Abdul Kabbani, Ahmad Gha-layini, Michael Papamichael, Mohammad Dohadwala, Lukas Gianinazzi, Mikhail Khalilov, Elias Achermann, Daniele De Sensi, and Torsten Hoefler. Reps: Recycled entropy packet spraying for adaptive load balancing and failure mitigation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21625 ,2025. [4] Jiaxin Cao, Rui Xia, Pengkun Yang, Chuanxiong Guo, Guohan Lu, Lihua Yuan, Yixin Zheng, Haitao Wu, Yongqiang Xiong, and Dave Maltz. Per-packet load-balanced, low-latency routing for clos-based data center networks. In Proceedings of the ninth ACM conference on Emerging networking experiments and technologies ,pages 49–60, 2013. [5] Jeffrey D Case, Mark Fedor, Martin L Schoffstall, and James Davin. RFC 1157: A Simple Network Man-agement Protocol (SNMP). Technical report, Internet Engineering Task Force, 1990. [6] Intel Corporation. Intel Intelligent Fabric Processors. 

https://www .intel .com/content/www/us/en/ products/network-io/programmable-ethernet-switch .html , accessed Apr 15, 2026. [7] Intel Corporation. Intel P4 Studio Software Devel-opment Environment (SDE). https://github .com/ p4lang/open-p4studio , accessed Apr 6, 2026. [8] NVIDIA Corporation. Datasheet: NVIDIA CONNECTX-6 DX Ethernet SmartNIC. 

https://www .nvidia .com/content/dam/en-zz/ Solutions/networking/ethernet-adapters/ ConnectX-6-Dx-Datasheet .pdf , accessed Apr 7, 2026. [9] NVIDIA Corporation. NVIDIA Spectrum SN6000 Ethernet Switch Series Datasheet. 

https://resources .nvidia .com/en-us-accelerated-networking-resource-library/ ethernet-datasheet-spectrum-sn6000-switch ,accessed Apr 21, 2026. [10] NVIDIA Corporation. NVIDIA Spectrum-X Network Platform Architecture. https: //resources .nvidia .com/en-us-accelerated-networking-resource-library/nvidia-spectrum-x , 2024. [11] NVIDIA Corporation. NVIDIA Super-charges Ethernet Networking for Generative AI. https://nvidianews .nvidia .com/news/ nvidia-supercharges-ethernet-networking-for-generative-ai , 2024. [12] NVIDIA Corporation. NVIDIA Spectrum-X Ethernet Networking Platform . https://www .nvidia .com/en-us/networking/spectrumx/ , accessed Apr 21, 2026, 2026. [13] Advait Dixit, Pawan Prakash, Y Charlie Hu, and Ra-mana Rao Kompella. On the impact of packet spraying in data center networks. In 2013 Proceedings IEEE INFOCOM , pages 2130–2138. IEEE, 2013. [14] Adithya Gangidi, Rui Miao, Shengbao Zheng, Sai Jayesh Bondu, Guilherme Goes, Hany Morsy, Ro-hit Puri, Mohammad Riftadi, Ashmitha Jeevaraj Shetty, Jingyi Yang, et al. Rdma over ethernet for distributed training at meta scale. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM 2024 Conference , pages 57–70, 2024. [15] Yunqi Gao, Bing Hu, Mahdi Boloursaz Mashhadi, A Jin, Yanfeng Zhang, Pei Xiao, Rahim Tafazolli, Mérouane Debbah, et al. FlowMoE: A Scalable Pipeline Scheduling Framework for Distributed Mixture-of-Experts Training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.00207 ,2025. [16] Soudeh Ghorbani, Zibin Yang, P Brighten Godfrey, Yashar Ganjali, and Amin Firoozshahian. Drill: Micro load balancing for low-latency data center networks. In 

Proceedings of the Conference of the ACM Special In-terest Group on Data Communication , pages 225–238, 2017. [17] Aaron Grattafiori, Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Alex Vaughan, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, Anirudh Goyal, An-thony Hartshorn, Aobo Yang, Archi Mitra, Archie Sra-vankumar, Artem Korenev, Arthur Hinsvark, Arun Rao, Aston Zhang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Austen Gregerson, Ava Spataru, Baptiste Roziere, Bethany Biron, Binh Tang, Bobbie Chern, Charlotte Caucheteux, Chaya Nayak, Chloe Bi, Chris Marra, Chris McConnell, 13 Christian Keller, Christophe Touret, Chunyang Wu, Corinne Wong, Cristian Canton Ferrer, Cyrus Niko-laidis, Damien Allonsius, Daniel Song, Danielle Pintz, Danny Livshits, Danny Wyatt, David Esiobu, Dhruv Choudhary, Dhruv Mahajan, Diego Garcia-Olano, Diego Perino, Dieuwke Hupkes, Egor Lakomkin, Ehab AlBadawy, Elina Lobanova, Emily Dinan, Eric Michael Smith, Filip Radenovic, Francisco Guzmán, Frank Zhang, Gabriel Synnaeve, Gabrielle Lee, Georgia Lewis Anderson, Govind Thattai, Graeme Nail, Gregoire Mi-alon, Guan Pang, Guillem Cucurell, Hailey Nguyen, Hannah Korevaar, Hu Xu, Hugo Touvron, Iliyan Zarov, Imanol Arrieta Ibarra, Isabel Kloumann, Ishan Misra, Ivan Evtimov, Jack Zhang, Jade Copet, Jaewon Lee, Jan Geffert, Jana Vranes, Jason Park, Jay Mahadeokar, Jeet Shah, Jelmer van der Linde, Jennifer Billock, Jenny Hong, Jenya Lee, Jeremy Fu, Jianfeng Chi, Jianyu Huang, Jiawen Liu, Jie Wang, Jiecao Yu, Joanna Bit-ton, Joe Spisak, Jongsoo Park, Joseph Rocca, Joshua Johnstun, Joshua Saxe, Junteng Jia, Kalyan Vasuden Alwala, Karthik Prasad, Kartikeya Upasani, Kate Plaw-iak, Ke Li, Kenneth Heafield, Kevin Stone, Khalid El-Arini, Krithika Iyer, Kshitiz Malik, Kuenley Chiu, Kunal Bhalla, Kushal Lakhotia, Lauren Rantala-Yeary, Lau-rens van der Maaten, Lawrence Chen, Liang Tan, Liz Jenkins, Louis Martin, Lovish Madaan, Lubo Malo, Lukas Blecher, Lukas Landzaat, Luke de Oliveira, Madeline Muzzi, Mahesh Pasupuleti, Mannat Singh, Manohar Paluri, Marcin Kardas, Maria Tsimpoukelli, Mathew Oldham, Mathieu Rita, Maya Pavlova, Melanie Kambadur, Mike Lewis, Min Si, Mitesh Kumar Singh, Mona Hassan, Naman Goyal, Narjes Torabi, Nikolay Bashlykov, Nikolay Bogoychev, Niladri Chatterji, Ning Zhang, Olivier Duchenne, Onur Çelebi, Patrick Al-rassy, Pengchuan Zhang, Pengwei Li, Petar Vasic, Peter Weng, Prajjwal Bhargava, Pratik Dubal, Praveen Krish-nan, Punit Singh Koura, Puxin Xu, Qing He, Qingx-iao Dong, Ragavan Srinivasan, Raj Ganapathy, Ra-mon Calderer, Ricardo Silveira Cabral, Robert Stojnic, Roberta Raileanu, Rohan Maheswari, Rohit Girdhar, Ro-hit Patel, Romain Sauvestre, Ronnie Polidoro, Roshan Sumbaly, Ross Taylor, Ruan Silva, Rui Hou, Rui Wang, Saghar Hosseini, Sahana Chennabasappa, Sanjay Singh, Sean Bell, Seohyun Sonia Kim, Sergey Edunov, Shao-liang Nie, Sharan Narang, Sharath Raparthy, Sheng Shen, Shengye Wan, Shruti Bhosale, Shun Zhang, Simon Vandenhende, Soumya Batra, Spencer Whit-man, Sten Sootla, Stephane Collot, Suchin Gururan-gan, Sydney Borodinsky, Tamar Herman, Tara Fowler, Tarek Sheasha, Thomas Georgiou, Thomas Scialom, To-bias Speckbacher, Todor Mihaylov, Tong Xiao, Ujjwal Karn, Vedanuj Goswami, Vibhor Gupta, Vignesh Ra-manathan, Viktor Kerkez, Vincent Gonguet, Virginie Do, Vish Vogeti, Vítor Albiero, Vladan Petrovic, Wei-wei Chu, Wenhan Xiong, Wenyin Fu, Whitney Meers, Xavier Martinet, Xiaodong Wang, Xiaofang Wang, Xi-aoqing Ellen Tan, Xide Xia, Xinfeng Xie, Xuchao Jia, Xuewei Wang, Yaelle Goldschlag, Yashesh Gaur, Yas-mine Babaei, Yi Wen, Yiwen Song, Yuchen Zhang, Yue Li, Yuning Mao, Zacharie Delpierre Coudert, Zheng Yan, Zhengxing Chen, Zoe Papakipos, Aaditya Singh, Aayushi Srivastava, Abha Jain, Adam Kelsey, Adam Shajnfeld, Adithya Gangidi, Adolfo Victoria, Ahuva Goldstand, Ajay Menon, Ajay Sharma, Alex Boesen-berg, Alexei Baevski, Allie Feinstein, Amanda Kallet, Amit Sangani, Amos Teo, Anam Yunus, Andrei Lupu, Andres Alvarado, Andrew Caples, Andrew Gu, Andrew Ho, Andrew Poulton, Andrew Ryan, Ankit Ramchan-dani, Annie Dong, Annie Franco, Anuj Goyal, Aparajita Saraf, Arkabandhu Chowdhury, Ashley Gabriel, Ash-win Bharambe, Assaf Eisenman, Azadeh Yazdan, Beau James, Ben Maurer, Benjamin Leonhardi, Bernie Huang, Beth Loyd, Beto De Paola, Bhargavi Paranjape, Bing Liu, Bo Wu, Boyu Ni, Braden Hancock, Bram Wasti, Brandon Spence, Brani Stojkovic, Brian Gamido, Britt Montalvo, Carl Parker, Carly Burton, Catalina Mejia, Ce Liu, Changhan Wang, Changkyu Kim, Chao Zhou, Chester Hu, Ching-Hsiang Chu, Chris Cai, Chris Tindal, Christoph Feichtenhofer, Cynthia Gao, Damon Civin, Dana Beaty, Daniel Kreymer, Daniel Li, David Adkins, David Xu, Davide Testuggine, Delia David, Devi Parikh, Diana Liskovich, Didem Foss, Dingkang Wang, Duc Le, Dustin Holland, Edward Dowling, Eissa Jamil, Elaine Montgomery, Eleonora Presani, Emily Hahn, Emily Wood, Eric-Tuan Le, Erik Brinkman, Esteban Arcaute, Evan Dunbar, Evan Smothers, Fei Sun, Felix Kreuk, Feng Tian, Filippos Kokkinos, Firat Ozgenel, Francesco Caggioni, Frank Kanayet, Frank Seide, Gabriela Medina Florez, Gabriella Schwarz, Gada Badeer, Georgia Swee, Gil Halpern, Grant Herman, Grigory Sizov, Guangyi, Zhang, Guna Lakshminarayanan, Hakan Inan, Hamid Shojanazeri, Han Zou, Hannah Wang, Hanwen Zha, Haroun Habeeb, Harrison Rudolph, Helen Suk, Henry Aspegren, Hunter Goldman, Hongyuan Zhan, Ibrahim Damlaj, Igor Molybog, Igor Tufanov, Ilias Leontiadis, Irina-Elena Veliche, Itai Gat, Jake Weissman, James Geboski, James Kohli, Janice Lam, Japhet Asher, Jean-Baptiste Gaya, Jeff Marcus, Jeff Tang, Jennifer Chan, Jenny Zhen, Jeremy Reizenstein, Jeremy Teboul, Jes-sica Zhong, Jian Jin, Jingyi Yang, Joe Cummings, Jon Carvill, Jon Shepard, Jonathan McPhie, Jonathan Tor-res, Josh Ginsburg, Junjie Wang, Kai Wu, Kam Hou U, Karan Saxena, Kartikay Khandelwal, Katayoun Zand, Kathy Matosich, Kaushik Veeraraghavan, Kelly Miche-lena, Keqian Li, Kiran Jagadeesh, Kun Huang, Ku-nal Chawla, Kyle Huang, Lailin Chen, Lakshya Garg, Lavender A, Leandro Silva, Lee Bell, Lei Zhang, Liang-peng Guo, Licheng Yu, Liron Moshkovich, Luca Wehrst-14 edt, Madian Khabsa, Manav Avalani, Manish Bhatt, Martynas Mankus, Matan Hasson, Matthew Lennie, Matthias Reso, Maxim Groshev, Maxim Naumov, Maya Lathi, Meghan Keneally, Miao Liu, Michael L. Seltzer, Michal Valko, Michelle Restrepo, Mihir Patel, Mik Vy-atskov, Mikayel Samvelyan, Mike Clark, Mike Macey, Mike Wang, Miquel Jubert Hermoso, Mo Metanat, Mohammad Rastegari, Munish Bansal, Nandhini San-thanam, Natascha Parks, Natasha White, Navyata Bawa, Nayan Singhal, Nick Egebo, Nicolas Usunier, Nikhil Mehta, Nikolay Pavlovich Laptev, Ning Dong, Norman Cheng, Oleg Chernoguz, Olivia Hart, Omkar Salpekar, Ozlem Kalinli, Parkin Kent, Parth Parekh, Paul Saab, Pa-van Balaji, Pedro Rittner, Philip Bontrager, Pierre Roux, Piotr Dollar, Polina Zvyagina, Prashant Ratanchan-dani, Pritish Yuvraj, Qian Liang, Rachad Alao, Rachel Rodriguez, Rafi Ayub, Raghotham Murthy, Raghu Nayani, Rahul Mitra, Rangaprabhu Parthasarathy, Ray-mond Li, Rebekkah Hogan, Robin Battey, Rocky Wang, Russ Howes, Ruty Rinott, Sachin Mehta, Sachin Siby, Sai Jayesh Bondu, Samyak Datta, Sara Chugh, Sara Hunt, Sargun Dhillon, Sasha Sidorov, Satadru Pan, Saurabh Mahajan, Saurabh Verma, Seiji Yamamoto, Sharadh Ramaswamy, Shaun Lindsay, Shaun Lind-say, Sheng Feng, Shenghao Lin, Shengxin Cindy Zha, Shishir Patil, Shiva Shankar, Shuqiang Zhang, Shuqiang Zhang, Sinong Wang, Sneha Agarwal, Soji Sajuyigbe, Soumith Chintala, Stephanie Max, Stephen Chen, Steve Kehoe, Steve Satterfield, Sudarshan Govindaprasad, Sumit Gupta, Summer Deng, Sungmin Cho, Sunny Virk, Suraj Subramanian, Sy Choudhury, Sydney Goldman, Tal Remez, Tamar Glaser, Tamara Best, Thilo Koehler, Thomas Robinson, Tianhe Li, Tianjun Zhang, Tim Matthews, Timothy Chou, Tzook Shaked, Varun Von-timitta, Victoria Ajayi, Victoria Montanez, Vijai Mohan, Vinay Satish Kumar, Vishal Mangla, Vlad Ionescu, Vlad Poenaru, Vlad Tiberiu Mihailescu, Vladimir Ivanov, Wei Li, Wenchen Wang, Wenwen Jiang, Wes Bouaziz, Will Constable, Xiaocheng Tang, Xiaojian Wu, Xiaolan Wang, Xilun Wu, Xinbo Gao, Yaniv Kleinman, Yanjun Chen, Ye Hu, Ye Jia, Ye Qi, Yenda Li, Yilin Zhang, Ying Zhang, Yossi Adi, Youngjin Nam, Yu, Wang, Yu Zhao, Yuchen Hao, Yundi Qian, Yunlu Li, Yuzi He, Zach Rait, Zachary DeVito, Zef Rosnbrick, Zhaoduo Wen, Zhenyu Yang, Zhiwei Zhao, and Zhiyu Ma. The Llama 3 Herd of Models, 2024. [18] The P4.org Applications Working Group. Teleme-try Report Format Specification Version 2.0. 

https://github .com/p4lang/p4-applications/ blob/master/docs/telemetry_report_v2_0 .pdf ,accessed Apr 17, 2026, 2020. [19] Haryadi S Gunawi, Mingzhe Hao, Tanakorn Leesata-pornwongsa, Tiratat Patana-Anake, Thanh Do, Jeffry Adityatama, Kurnia J Eliazar, Agung Laksono, Jeffrey F Lukman, Vincentius Martin, et al. What bugs live in the cloud? a study of 3000+ issues in cloud systems. In Pro-ceedings of the ACM symposium on cloud computing ,pages 1–14, 2014. [20] Haryadi S Gunawi, Riza O Suminto, Russell Sears, Casey Golliher, Swaminathan Sundararaman, Xing Lin, Tim Emami, Weiguang Sheng, Nematollah Bidokhti, Caitie McCaffrey, et al. Fail-slow at scale: Evidence of hardware performance faults in large production sys-tems. ACM Transactions on Storage (TOS) , 14(3):1–26, 2018. [21] Chuanxiong Guo, Lihua Yuan, Dong Xiang, Yingnong Dang, Ray Huang, Dave Maltz, Zhaoyi Liu, Vin Wang, Bin Pang, Hua Chen, et al. Pingmesh: A large-scale system for data center network latency measurement and analysis. In Proceedings of the 2015 ACM Confer-ence on Special Interest Group on Data Communication ,pages 139–152, 2015. [22] Yibo Guo, William M Mellette, Alex C Snoeren, and George Porter. Scaling beyond packet switch limits with multiple dataplanes. In Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on emerging Networking EX-periments and Technologies , pages 214–231, 2022. [23] Peng Huang, Chuanxiong Guo, Lidong Zhou, Jacob R Lorch, Yingnong Dang, Murali Chintalapati, and Ran-dolph Yao. Gray failure: The achilles’ heel of cloud-scale systems. In Proceedings of the 16th Workshop on Hot Topics in Operating Systems , pages 150–155, 2017. [24] IEEE. IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area Networks–Bridges and Bridged Networks. IEEE Std 802.1Q-2022 (Revision of IEEE Std 802.1Q-2018) ,pages 1–2163, 2022. [25] Cisco Systems Inc. Cisco Nexus 9000 Se-ries NX-OS Unicast Routing Configuration Guide, Configure Dynamic Load Balancing. 

https://www .cisco .com/c/en/us/td/docs/ dcn/nx-os/nexus9000/105x/unicast-routing-configuration/cisco-nexus-9000-series-nx-os-unicast-routing-configuration-guide/m-configure-dynamic-load-balancing .html , 2025. [26] Chenhao Jia, Tian Pan, Zizheng Bian, Xingchen Lin, Enge Song, Cheng Xu, Tao Huang, and Yunjie Liu. Rapid detection and localization of gray failures in data centers via in-band network telemetry. In NOMS 2020-2020 IEEE/IFIP Network Operations and Management Symposium , pages 1–9. IEEE, 2020. [27] Mohan Kalkunte, Niranjan Vaidya, and Pete Del Vecchio. Cognitive routing in the Tomahawk 5 data 15 center switch. https://www .broadcom .com/blog/ cognitive-routing-in-the-tomahawk-5-data-center-switch , 2023. [28] Berkin Kartal. AI Fabric Resiliency and Why Network Convergence Matters. https: //developer .nvidia .com/blog/ai-fabric-resiliency-and-why-network-convergence-matters/ , accessed Apr 23, 2026, 2025. [29] John Kim, William J. Dally, and Dennis Abts. Adap-tive routing in high-radix clos network. In Proceedings of the 2006 ACM/IEEE Conference on Supercomput-ing , SC ’06, page 92–es, New York, NY, USA, 2006. Association for Computing Machinery. [30] Apostolos Kokolis, Michael Kuchnik, John Hoffman, Adithya Kumar, Parth Malani, Faye Ma, Zachary De-Vito, Shubho Sengupta, Kalyan Saladi, and Carole-Jean Wu. Revisiting reliability in large-scale machine learn-ing research clusters. In 2025 IEEE International Sym-posium on High Performance Computer Architecture (HPCA) , pages 1259–1274. IEEE, 2025. [31] Jakob Krebs, Dimitry Gavrilenko, Daniel Amir, Shir Landau Feibish, and Mark Silberstein. FlowPulse: Catching Network Failures in ML Clusters. In Pro-ceedings of the 24th ACM Workshop on Hot Topics in Networks , pages 139–148, 2025. [32] Jiamin Li, Yimin Jiang, Yibo Zhu, Cong Wang, and Hong Xu. Accelerating distributed {MoE } training and inference with lina. In 2023 USENIX Annual Technical Conference (USENIX ATC 23) , pages 945–959, 2023. [33] Jinkun Lin, Ziheng Jiang, Zuquan Song, Sida Zhao, Menghan Yu, Zhanghan Wang, Chenyuan Wang, Zuocheng Shi, Xiang Shi, Wei Jia, et al. Understanding stragglers in large model training using what-if analy-sis. In 19th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 25) , pages 483–498, 2025. [34] Kefei Liu, Zhuo Jiang, Jiao Zhang, Shixian Guo, Xuan Zhang, Yangyang Bai, Yongbin Dong, Feng Luo, Zhang Zhang, Lei Wang, et al. R-pingmesh: A service-aware roce network monitoring and diagnostic system. In 

Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM 2024 Conference ,pages 554–567, 2024. [35] Wei Liu, Kun Qian, Zhenhua Li, Tianyin Xu, Yunhao Liu, Weicheng Wang, Yun Zhang, Jiakang Li, Shuhong Zhu, Xue Li, et al. SkeletonHunter: Diagnosing and Localizing Network Failures in Containerized Large Model Training. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM 2025 Conference , pages 527–540, 2025. [36] Sarah McClure, Evyatar Cohen, Alex Shpiner, Mark Silberstein, Sylvia Ratnasamy, Scott Shenker, and Isaac Keslassy. Load balancing for AI training workloads. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.21372 , 2025. [37] Radhika Mittal, Alexander Shpiner, Aurojit Panda, Eitan Zahavi, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Sylvia Ratnasamy, and Scott Shenker. Revisiting network support for RDMA. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the ACM Special Interest Group on Data Communication , pages 313–326, 2018. [38] Michael Mitzenmacher. The power of two choices in randomized load balancing. IEEE transactions on par-allel and distributed systems , 12(10):1094–1104, 2002. [39] Cornelis Networks. Cornelis CN5000 Omni-Path Switch. https://www .cornelis .com/product/ cornelis-cn5000-omni-path-switch?tab= Highlights , 2025. [40] Juniper Networks. Weighted Packet Spray –AI-ML Data Center Feature Guide. https: //www .juniper .net/documentation/us/en/ software/junos/ai-ml-evo/topics/topic-map/weighted-packet-spray .html , accessed Apr 21, 2026. [41] NS3 Contributors and Maintainers. NS-3 Network Simulator. https://www.nsnam.org/, 2025. [42] Kun Qian, Yongqing Xi, Jiamin Cao, Jiaqi Gao, Yichi Xu, Yu Guan, Binzhang Fu, Xuemei Shi, Fangbo Zhu, Rui Miao, et al. Alibaba hpn: A data center network for large language model training. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM 2024 Conference , pages 691–706, 2024. [43] Peter Rizk. Turbocharging Generative AI Work-loads with NVIDIA Spectrum-X Networking Platform. https://developer .nvidia .com/blog/ turbocharging-ai-workloads-with-nvidia-spectrum-x-networking-platform/ , 2023. [44] José Rocher-González, Ernst Gunnar Gran, Sven-Arne Reinemo, Tor Skeie, Jesús Escudero-Sahuquillo, Pe-dro Javier García, and Francisco J Quiles Flor. Adaptive routing in infiniband hardware. In 2022 22nd IEEE International Symposium on Cluster, Cloud and Internet Computing (CCGrid) , pages 463–472. IEEE, 2022. [45] Arjun Roy, Hongyi Zeng, Jasmeet Bagga, and Alex C. Snoeren. Passive Realtime Datacenter Fault Detection and Localization. In 14th USENIX Symposium on Net-worked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 17) ,pages 595–612, Boston, MA, March 2017. USENIX Association. 16 [46] Omkar Salpekar, Rohan Varma, Kenny Yu, Vladimir Ivanov, Yang Wang, Ahmed Sharif, Min Si, Shawn Xu, Feng Tian, Shengbao Zheng, Tristan Rice, Ankush Garg, Shangfu Peng, Shreyas Siravara, Wenyin Fu, Rodrigo de Castro, Adithya Gangidi, Andrey Obraztsov, Sharan Narang, Sergey Edunov, Maxim Naumov, Chunqiang Tang, and Mathew Oldham. Training LLMs with Fault Tolerant HSDP on 100,000 GPUs, 2026. [47] Pavel Shamis, Manjunath Gorentla Venkata, M Graham Lopez, Matthew B Baker, Oscar Hernandez, Yossi Itigin, Mike Dubman, Gilad Shainer, Richard L Graham, Liran Liss, et al. UCX: an open source framework for HPC network APIs and beyond. In 2015 IEEE 23rd Annual Symposium on High-Performance Interconnects , pages 40–43. IEEE, 2015. [48] Alex Shapiro. NVIDIA Ethernet Networking Acceler-ates World’s Largest AI Supercomputer, Built by xAI. 

https://nvidianews .nvidia .com/news/spectrum-x-ethernet-networking-xai-colossus , 2024. [49] Alexander Shpiner, Zachy Haramaty, Saar Eliad, Vladimir Zdornov, Barak Gafni, and Eitan Zahavi. Drag-onfly+: Low cost topology for scaling datacenters. In 2017 IEEE 3rd International Workshop on High-Performance Interconnection Networks in the Exascale and Big-Data Era (HiPINEB) , pages 1–8. IEEE, 2017. [50] Min Si, Pavan Balaji, Yongzhou Chen, Ching-Hsiang Chu, Adi Gangidi, Saif Hasan, Subodh Iyengar, Dan Johnson, Bingzhe Liu, Regina Ren, Deep Shah, Ashmitha Jeevaraj Shetty, Greg Steinbrecher, Yulun Wang, Bruce Wu, Xinfeng Xie, Jingyi Yang, Mingran Yang, Kenny Yu, Minlan Yu, Cen Zhao, Wes Bland, Denis Boyda, Suman Gumudavelli, Prashanth Kan-nan, Cristian Lumezanu, Rui Miao, Zhe Qu, Venkat Ramesh, Maxim Samoylov, Jan Seidel, Srikanth Sun-daresan, Feng Tian, Qiye Tan, Shuqiang Zhang, Yi-meng Zhao, Shengbao Zheng, Art Zhu, and Hongyi Zeng. Collective Communication for 100k+ GPUs. 

https://arxiv .org/abs/2510 .20171 , 2026. [51] Rachee Singh, Muqeet Mukhtar, Ashay Krishna, Aniruddha Parkhi, Jitendra Padhye, and David Maltz. Surviving switch failures in cloud datacenters. ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review , 51(2):2– 9, 2021. [52] Cheng Tan, Ze Jin, Chuanxiong Guo, Tianrong Zhang, Haitao Wu, Karl Deng, Dongming Bi, and Dong Xiang. NetBouncer: Active device and link failure localization in data center networks. In 16th USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 19) , pages 599–614, 2019. [53] Manjunath Gorentla Venkata, Valentine Petrov, Sergey Lebedev, Devendar Bureddy, Ferrol Aderholdt, Joshua Ladd, Gil Bloch, Mike Dubman, and Gilad Shainer. Unified collective communication (UCC): An unified library for cpu, gpu, and dpu collectives. In 2024 IEEE Symposium on High-Performance Interconnects (HOTI) ,pages 37–46. IEEE, 2024. [54] Pradeep Vincent, Jag Brar, and David Becker. First Principles: Oracle Acceleron Multiplanar Networking Architecture. https://blogs .oracle .com/cloud-infrastructure/first-principles-acceleron-multiplanar-networking , accessed Apr 22, 2026. [55] Koushnir Vladimir. Recommended Topolo-gies for Implementing an HPC Cluster with NVIDIA Quantum InfiniBand Solutions - Part 2 - Adaptive routing, HBF and SHIELD. 

https://enterprise-support .nvidia .com/ s/article/Recommended-Topologies-for-Implementing-an-HPC-Cluster-with-NVIDIA-Quantum-InfiniBand-Solutions-Part-2 , 2024. [56] William Won, Taekyung Heo, Saeed Rashidi, Srinivas Sridharan, Sudarshan Srinivasan, and Tushar Krishna. Astra-sim2. 0: Modeling hierarchical networks and disaggregated systems for large-model training at scale. In 2023 IEEE International Symposium on Performance Analysis of Systems and Software (ISPASS) , pages 283– 294. IEEE, 2023. [57] Yifan Xiong, Yuting Jiang, Ziyue Yang, Lei Qu, Gu-oshuai Zhao, Shuguang Liu, Dong Zhong, Boris Pinzur, Jie Zhang, Yang Wang, et al. SuperBench: Improving Cloud AI Infrastructure Reliability with Proactive Vali-dation. In 2024 USENIX Annual Technical Conference (USENIX ATC 24) , pages 835–850, 2024. [58] Zhu Yibo, Kang Nanxi, Cao Jiaxin, et al. Packet-level telemetry in large datacenter networks. In Proc of the 2015 ACM Conference on Special Interest Group on Data Communication. New York: ACM Press , pages 479–491, 2015. [59] Zhuolong Yu, Bowen Su, Wei Bai, Shachar Raindel, Vladimir Braverman, and Xin Jin. Understanding the micro-behaviors of hardware offloaded network stacks with lumina. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM 2023 Conference , pages 1074–1087, 2023. [60] Yibo Zhu, Haggai Eran, Daniel Firestone, Chuanxiong Guo, Marina Lipshteyn, Yehonatan Liron, Jitendra Pad-hye, Shachar Raindel, Mohamad Haj Yahia, and Ming Zhang. Congestion control for large-scale RDMA de-ployments. ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communica-tion Review , 45(4):523–536, 2015. 17 [61] Danyang Zhuo, Monia Ghobadi, Ratul Mahajan, Klaus-Tycho Förster, Arvind Krishnamurthy, and Thomas An-derson. Understanding and mitigating packet corrup-tion in data center networks. In Proceedings of the Conference of the ACM Special Interest Group on Data Communication , pages 362–375, 2017. 

## A Additional Experiments 

Fig. 11 corroborates the robustness claims made in §5.4. This figure evaluates the effects of preexisting failures, simultane-ous failures, and congestion control effects on false negative detection rates. For each case, we evaluate the ability to detect gray failures with 1.5%, 1.0%, and 0.5% drop rates using 7k, 20k, and 60k packets per spine, respectively. In all cases, the false negative rate is 0%. Additionally, no false positives were observed. This confirms that SprayCheck is robust to all three of these sources of measurement noise. 

## B Tofino Testbed Implementation 

We implement the SprayCheck prototype using the Intel Tofino 1 programmable switch platform for real world evalu-ations. Due to resource limitations, we emulate a 16-switch network using two physical switches: one to simulate 16 virtual switches, and one to inject failures. The evaluation additionally uses a P 416 implementation of a failure injector, adaptive routing, and congestion markings. 

Switch Multiplexing. We multiplex a single physical switch into 16 virtual vSwitches. Each virtual switch runs as its own instantiation of a control block. Since our switch has fewer physical ports than our topology has virtual links between vSwitches, we multiplex physical links into virtual ones using VLANs. When a packet arrives, it is dispatched to one of the vSwitches based on the packet’s VLAN tag. The receiving vSwitch selects the next hop by changing the packet VLAN tag. Each virtual link between two vSwitches has one VLAN ID per direction. For example, when switch 1 wants to send a packet to switch 5, it sets the VLAN tag to 0x15 ,while the tag 0x51 is used for the reverse link. The dispatcher invokes the vSwitch control block matching lowest 4 bits of the VLAN tag. 

Shortest Queue Routing. Implementing shortest queue packet spraying requires balancing across multiple output queues. However, since the testbed implements virtual switches, each vSwitch should ideally use its own indepen-dent set of queues for balancing. This is impossible to im-plement on the Tofino platform. Since our implementation only needs to mimic the spraying behavior and not the exact queuing delay, we use per-queue counters to approximate the spraying behavior of per-switch queues. Due to switch multiplexing, packets traverse the same physical links, but 0.0 2.5 5.0 7.5 10.0       

> Number of preexisting Failures
> 0.0
> 0.5
> 1.0
> FNR
> 7k Packets/Spine @ 1.5%
> 20k Packets/Spine @ 1%
> 60k Packets/Spine @ 0.5%
> (a) Preexisting Failures [Simulation] 246
> Impaired Links [%]
> 0.0
> 0.5
> 1.0
> FNR
> 7k Packets/Spine @ 1.5%
> 20k Packets/Spine @ 1%
> 60k Packets/Spine @ 0.5% (b) Simultaneous Failures [Simula-tion] 36 38 40 42
> Bandwidth (Gb/s)
> 0.0
> 0.5
> 1.0
> FNR
> 7k Packets/Spine @ 1.5%
> 20k Packets/Spine @ 1%
> 60k Packets/Spine @ 0.5%
> (c) Congestion Control [Testbed]

Figure 11: Robustness results. The graphs show the claimed robustness to preexisting failures, simultaneous gray failures, and congestion control, claimed in §5.4 20 

> 150
> 500
> 1.5k
> 5k
> 20k
> 500k
> ECN marking threshold

0

20 

40 

> Mean TPut [Gb/s]

0

10 

> k$#CNPs
> RoCE Bisection
> Num CNPs

Figure 12: Throughput and number of congestion notification packets (CNPs) received during a RoCEv2 bisection band-width test with different ECN thresholds set on a virtual queue in the testbed. Increasing the threshold results in fewer CNPs and higher throughput. are sprayed across different VLAN tags corresponding to different virtual upstream links. We simulate the queuing in each vSwitch using per-VLAN packet counters. The counters are decremented at a constant rate by Tofino-generated timer packets. Because of Tofino’s memory access limitation, we split the logic for normal traf-fic into two, alternating on every packet: (1) We randomly sample two queue length counters and send the packet to the one with the lower counter. We store the chosen queue ID in a register. (2) We send the packet to the same queue ID as the previous and increment the counter for that queue. This implementation drains the queues at a constant rate and incre-ments them once for every two sent packets, while sending packets to the shortest out of two random queues. 

Limiting Virtual Link Bandwidth. Since all virtual cross-switch links share the same physical links, they can impact each other’s bandwidth usage. For example, a high bandwidth between vSwitch 1 and 9 could congest a physical link shared with a flow between vSwitch 3 and 11, thus impacting that 18 flow as well. To isolate the bandwidth usage of each virtual link to an equal share, we inject congestion markings on all packets on a virtual link to reduce the sending rate until the queue length drops below the marking threshold. Fig. 12 shows the reduce sending rate of a RoCEv2 flow with conges-tion markings. Setting equal marking thresholds on all queue counters limits the sending rate of all flows independent of the path in the network. 

Failure Injection. To simulate gray failures, we selec-tively drop a portion of packets with the VLAN tags cor-responding to the link experiencing the gray failure. We interpose each cross switch link in our testbed topology with another Intel Tofino switch running an adapted version of the failure injector used in [59]. This system allows us to define a per-link packet drop rate, as well as to modify it at runtime. 

Resource Consumption. The data plane implementation consists of 1504 LoC in P 416 for both SprayCheck and the entire testbed. The control plane implementation consists of 2611 LoC in Python which set up routing tables, the entire SprayCheck system, and a remote control interface to inject failures and read packet counter via the network for bench-marking. The data plane implementation requires 11 stages of the Tofino 1 pipeline, uses 31 .35% of the switch’s SRAM and requires 103 bits of the packet header vector. 19