Title: FedSQ: Optimized Weight Averaging via Fixed Gating

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.02990v1

Published Time: Mon, 06 Apr 2026 00:52:46 GMT

Number of Pages: 6

Markdown Content:
# FED SQ: Optimized Weight Averaging via Fixed Gating 

Cristian P´ erez-Corral* 

Universitat Polit` ecnica de Val` encia 

Valencia, Spain cpercor@upv.es Jose I. Mestre 

Universitat Polit` ecnica de Val` encia 

Valencia, Spain jimesmir@disca.upv.es Alberto Fern´ andez-Hern´ andez 

Universitat Polit` ecnica de Val` encia 

Valencia, Spain a.fernandez@upv.es Manuel F. Dolz 

Universitat Jaume I 

Castell´ o de la Plana, Spain dolzm@uji.es Jos´ e Duato 

Openchip & Software Technologies 

Barcelona, Spain jose.duato@openchip.es Enrique S. Quintana-Ort´ ı

Universitat Polit` ecnica de Val` encia 

Valencia, Spain quintana@disca.upv.es 

Abstract —Federated learning (FL) enables collaborative train-ing across organizations without sharing raw data, but it is hindered by statistical heterogeneity (non-i.i.d. client data) and by instability of naive weight averaging under client drift. In many cross-silo deployments, FL is warm-started from a strong pretrained backbone (e.g., ImageNet-1K) and then adapted to local domains. Motivated by recent evidence that ReLU-like gating regimes (structural knowledge) stabilize earlier than the remaining parameter values (quantitative knowledge), we propose FED SQ (Federated Structural-Quantitative learning), a transfer-initialized neural federated procedure based on aDualCopy, piecewise-linear view of deep networks. FED SQ freezes a structural copy of the pretrained model to induce fixed binary gating masks during federated fine-tuning, while only a quantitative copy is optimized locally and aggregated across rounds. Fixing the gating reduces learning to within-regime affine refinements, which stabilizes aggregation under heterogeneous partitions. Experiments on two convolutional neural network backbones under i.i.d. and Dirichlet splits show that F ED SQ improves robustness and can reduce rounds-to-best validation performance relative to standard baselines while preserving accuracy in the transfer setting. 

Index Terms —Federated learning, cross-silo, transfer learn-ing, ImageNet pretraining, activation patterns, communication efficiency 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

The proliferation of connected devices and the digitization of organizational processes have led to an unprecedented amount of data being generated in distributed settings. In many real-world scenarios, collecting such data in a centralized repository is impractical or undesirable due to privacy, legal, or operational constraints. In this context, Federated Learning (FL) has emerged as a paradigm to collaboratively train Machine Learning (ML) and Deep Learning (DL) models while keeping raw data local to each participant [1], [2]. Despite its appeal, FL introduces fundamental challenges that are absent or less pronounced in centralized training. 

> *Corresponding author

First, client data is often statistically heterogeneous (non-i.i.d.), which can lead to unstable or slow convergence and to suboptimal global models when using standard federated averaging [1]. This heterogeneity may stem from label dis-tribution shifts, feature shifts, or domain shifts across clients, motivating a large body of work aimed at improving robust-ness under non-i.i.d. data. Representative examples include approaches based on local normalization to address feature shift (F ED BN) [3], methods that exploit shared represen-tations with personalized local components (F ED REP ) [4], and architectures that explicitly account for heterogeneity through specialization, such as federated mixtures of experts (F ED MIX ) [5]. Second, communication between server and clients fre-cuently becomes a dominant bottleneck, particularly when models are large or bandwidth is limited. Beyond reducing the number of communication rounds by increasing local computation (as in federated averaging), a complementary line of work targets communication efficiency through structured updates [6], gradient quantization [7], aggressive sparsifica-tion [8], or compression schemes tailored to federated non-i.i.d. regimes (e.g., STC) [9]. These methods highlight a central trade-off in FL: improving statistical efficiency (accuracy and convergence) while minimizing system costs (communication, latency, and client-side computation). A practical aspect often overlooked in methodological dis-cussions is that many real deployments of FL do not start from random initialization. Instead, it is common to warm-start federated training from a backbone pre-trained on large-scale public data (e.g., ImageNet-1K in computer vision) and then perform federated fine-tuning on the private client datasets. Recent systematic studies show that such pre-trained initialization can reduce the number of communication rounds required to reach a target accuracy and can dampen the adverse effects of data and system heterogeneity in federated optimiza-tion [10]–[12]. This practice is also consistent with classical Transfer Learning (TL) evidence that early representations 

> arXiv:2604.02990v1 [cs.LG] 3 Apr 2026

learned on large visual corpora tend to be broadly reusable across downstream tasks [13]. Recent work suggests that learning dynamics in ReLU-based Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) can be fruitfully un-derstood through two complementary components: Structural Knowledge (SK) and Quantitative Knowledge (QK). SK cor-responds to the gating behaviour induced by ReLU nonlinear-ities, i.e., the activation masks (activation patterns) that select active paths and thus, the piecewise-affine region in which the network operates for a given input. QK corresponds to the numerical values of weights and biases that determine the affine mapping within those active regions. Empirical evidence [14] suggests that activation-pattern changes decay substantially earlier than weight-update magnitudes across multiple architectures, motivating a two-phase interpretation of training. Along the same lines, Duato et al. [15] formal-ize the SK/QK separation and demonstrate that freezing the structural component while retraining only QK can accelerate (re-)training, with direct implications for incremental and federated re-training. Inspired by these findings, we propose FED SQ, where all participants start from the same ImageNet-1K pretrained initialization, which acts as the fixed structural component, while clients communicate and aggregate only QK updates. This induces a late-stage specialization in which optimization proceeds largely within stable activation regimes, reducing client-side compute and improving performance per round in the federated stage. Therefore, in this paper we make the following contribu-tions:  

> •

We introduce FED SQ, a transfer-initialized two-stage FL procedure that decouples structural (gating) from 

quantitative (weights) knowledge for cross-silo settings.  

> •

We design a federated protocol that freezes the structural component and aggregates only quantitative updates.  

> •

We empirically evaluate F ED SQ against standard feder-ated baselines under heterogeneous client data and report improvements in convergence efficiency. II. R ELATED WORK 

FL trains models across distributed data holders without moving raw data, typically via iterative rounds of local opti-mization followed by server-side aggregation [1]. In practical deployments, cross-silo FL involves a small number of sta-ble clients with reliable connectivity, while cross-device FL targets massive numbers of intermittently available devices; these regimes differ in their dominant bottlenecks [2]. A core difficulty is that client data are typically non-i.i.d., yielding slow or unstable convergence under vanilla F ED AVG due to 

client drift . F ED PROX mitigates client drift with a proximal term discouraging excessive deviation from the global iter-ate [16]. Adaptive server-side optimization (F ED OPT , includ-ing F ED ADAM /F ED YOGI ) improves robustness and tuning un-der heterogeneous data [17]. Beyond label skew, non-i.i.d. fea-ture distributions can cause mismatched batch-normalization statistics and degrade aggregation quality; F ED BN addresses this by keeping batch normalization statistics local [3]. An-other branch targets personalization by learning shared rep-resentations with client-specific components, such as FE-

> D

REP [4] or F ED BABU [18]. TL is the de facto starting point in many cross-silo vision deployments: models are initialized from pretrained backbones and then adapted to downstream domains. The transferability of deep representations has been extensively studied; notably, some studies [13] quantify how transferability decreases from early to late layers and identify co-adaptation as a practical obstacle. These motivates our design choice to (i) initialize from a strong pretrained model and (ii) constrain the subse-quent federated adaptation to the subset of parameters that most benefit from domain-specific refinement, which appears to mitigates the umbalanced and drift effect. Our method relates to an emerging perspective that many DNNs can be viewed through a gating lens, where a discrete routing/selection mechanism determines which computational substructures are active, and the remaining parameters refine the mapping within those selected regimes. While the original SK/QK decomposition in [14], [15] is articulated for ReLU architectures (where the gate is naturally binary), F ED SQ does not assume ReLU nor any specific activation in the pretrained backbone. Instead, we explicitly introduce a binary gating surrogate, enforcing a hard (ReLU-like) activation mask during the federated stage, regardless of the activation used during pretraining. This yields a well-defined separation between SK (the induced binary gating patterns) and QK (the parameters optimized within those fixed patterns), allowing us to freeze the former and federate only the latter to enable efficient specialization under heterogeneous client data. III. M ETHOD PROPOSAL 

A. Background 

In this work, we focus primarily on Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), as they are among the most widely adopted architectures in DL. To formalize the setting of our proposal, we first introduce the following two definitions, which provide the necessary background on CNN and activation patterns. 

Definition 1. A CNN is a Feedforward Neural Network (FF) that maps an input image tensor x ∈ RC0×H0×W0 to an output 

f (x; w) by applying a sequence of L convolutional blocks followed by a head. Given h0 := x, we have: 

zℓ = Conv ℓ(hℓ−1; wℓ) hℓ = ϕℓ

 zℓ

, ℓ = 1 , . . . , L, f (x; w) = g(hL; wout ).

Here, Conv ℓ(·; wℓ) denotes a convolutional layer (with its weights wℓ), ϕℓ is the activation function (and possibly batch normalization/pooling/residual addition), zℓ corresponds with the preactivation of layer ℓ, hℓ corresponds to the input to layer ℓ + 1 , and g is the final classifier/regressor head. The full parameter set is w = {w1, . . . , w L, w out }.

Definition 2. Consider a CNN with L convolutional blocks that include a pointwise nonlinearity. For an input x ∈RC0×H0×W0 , let zℓ(x; w) denote the pre-activation tensor of block ℓ (the tensor right before the nonlinearity is applied). We define the activation mask of block ℓ as 

αℓ(x; w) := 1zℓ(x; w) > 0,

where 1 indicates the characteristic function, and the inequal-ity is applied elementwise, so αℓ(x; w) is a binary tensor with the same shape as zℓ(x; w). The activation pattern induced by 

x is the collection of all masks across blocks: 

α(x; w) :=  α1(x; w), . . . , α L(x; w).

B. Federated algorithm proposal 

In FL ( e.g. , [1], [17]), the goal is to minimize 

L(w) = 

> M

X

> i=1

ni

n Li(w), where n =

> M

X

> i=1

ni;

M denotes the number of clients, ni is the number of samples held by client i, and n is the total number of samples across all clients. In addition, the local objective is 

Li(w) = Ex∼D i

 ℓi(w; x) ,

where Di is the data distribution of client i, and ℓi(w; x) is the per-sample loss (e.g., cross-entropy) evaluated by the shared parameters w on sample x. We adopt the standard assumptions in [17] for nonconvex optimization. In a standard synchronous federated round t, the server samples a subset of clients and broadcasts the current global parameters wt. Each selected client i then performs several local optimization steps on its private data, producing either an updated set of parameters wt+1 ,i or an equivalent update 

∆wt,i . The server aggregates these client contributions to obtain the next global iterate wt+1 , which is then broadcasted to clients for the next round [1], [17]. Let f denote the model to be federated, with parameters 

w. Following the DualCopy construction of [15], we rewrite the model as a duplicated-parameter approximation with two disjoint copies, 

ˆw =  wSK , w QK .

Intuitively, from a certain point on we duplicate w onto wSK ,which encodes the structural component that induces (binary) gating regimes; and wQK , which encodes the quantitative 

component of the within-regime mappings. Although this construction doubles the stored parameters, it preserves the number of trainable parameters in our procedure as wSK is kept frozen while wQK is optimized and aggregated. All participants (server and clients) initialize from a shared pretrained checkpoint wPT . This warm-start is a key departure from training-from-scratch FL: the federation begins from a representation that already captures generic visual structure, and subsequent training focuses on efficient downstream adap-tation. In our setting, the pretrained initialization instantiates the structural component, i.e., we set wSK ← wPT at initial-ization. Given an input x ∈ RC0×H0×W0 , the structural copy SK produces pre-activations zSK  

> ℓ

(x) and induces a fixed binary mask αℓ(x) := 1[zSK  

> ℓ

(x) > 0] . During the federated stage, the quantitative copy computes zQK  

> ℓ

(x) and applies the fixed gate: 

hℓ(x) = αℓ(x) ⊙ zQK  

> ℓ

(x),

where ⊙ corresponds to the elementwise product. Conditioned on {αℓ(x)}ℓ, the network reduces to a within-region affine map, where the network behaves as a linear transformation plus bias within the corresponding region [15]. Hence, freezing 

wSK amounts to fixing the per-sample routing mechanism, while federated training updates only the within-region affine parameters encoded by wQK . This knowledge separation is illustrated in Figure 1. Let D0 denote a calibration set which can be public, synthetic, or obtained via privacy-preserving transformations of client data. Let S ⊂ D 0 be a fixed probe subset used for evaluation. In this paper, we warm-start from pretrained weights, which can be interpreted as already providing a structurally mature initialization. We propose a centralized phase used to select an effective TL strategy for the federation. Specifically, starting from the shared pretrained checkpoint 

wPT , the server performs a lightweight calibration step on 

S: it does not attempt to train the final federated model, but instead evaluates candidate TL schedules (which layers to freeze/unfreeze and in what order) and selects the schedule that yields the most stable and effective adaptation from wPT 

on the probe set S. The selected schedule is then broadcast to all clients, which follow it during federated training to enforce a consistent adaptation protocol across silos and to mitigate catastrophic forgetting of the pretrained representation. After this, we freeze the structural component wSK and run standard synchronous FL rounds in which clients update only wQK on their private data. Concretely, during local training each client uses the frozen wSK to compute binary gating masks and optimizes wQK within these fixed activation regimes. Server aggregation is performed on wQK only, fol-lowing the same schema as F ED AVG . Algorithm 1 summarizes the full procedure. Lines 2-6 correspond to the TL regime: the server evaluates candidate TL schedules, selects the best-performing one, broadcasts it to all clients, and instantiates the structural component with the pretrained weights. Once wSK 

is determined, the server broadcasts it to all clients and the fed-erated stage commences. At each round, the server samples a subset of clients (line 8) and broadcasts the current quantitative parameters. Each selected client then trains locally for a fixed number of epochs on its private data, keeping wSK frozen and updating only wQK according to the selected schedule. Finally, the server aggregates the received quantitative parameters (line 15) to form the next global quantitative iterate. This federated loop (lines 7–15) is repeated for T communication rounds. IV. E XPERIMENTS 

The primary objective of this evaluation is to assess the performance of F ED SQ against standard federated aggregation schemes under identical experimental conditions, including (i) 

a common pretrained initialization; and (ii) a centrally selected Fig. 1: Decoupling view of a network into SK representing the values of the activations (left), represented by activation masks (gating); and QK, represented by the affine parameters (edge coefficients), with its activation patterns frozen (right). In F ED SQ, models are initialized from a common pretrained checkpoint and then adapted federatively by updating only QK after structural stabilization. 

Algorithm 1 FED SQ: transfer-initialized calibration of TL schedule + federated QK optimization  

> 1:

Input: clients {1, . . . , M } with local datasets {D i} and sizes {ni}; S ∈ D 0 subset; pretrained checkpoint wPT ;local epochs E; total rounds T ; sampled clients per round 

K. 

> 2:

σ ← ObtainSchedule  wPT , S . 

> 3:

Broadcast training schedule σ to all clients.  

> 4:

wSK ← wPT . 

> 5:

wQK ← wPT . 

> 6:

Freeze wSK and broadcast it once to all clients.  

> 7:

for t = 0 , . . . , T − 1 do  

> 8:

Server samples K ⊆ M clients and broadcasts wQK  

> t

. 

> 9:

for each client i ∈ K in parallel do  

> 10:

Client follows schedule σ and updates only wQK . 

> 11:

Client computes binary gating masks {αℓ(x; wSK )}ℓ. 

> 12:

Client trains for E local epochs on Di, obtaining 

wQK 

> t+1 ,i

. 

> 13:

Client sends wQK  

> t+1 ,i

to the server.  

> 14:

end for  

> 15:

Server aggregates QK: 

wQK  

> t+1

= X

> i∈K t

ni

P 

> j∈K t

nj

wQK 

> t+1 ,i

. 

> 16:

end for 

TL schedule when applicable. Accordingly, our hyperparam-eter choices are not intended to reflect an optimal or realistic federated tuning procedure, but rather to establish a strong and stable baseline so that performance differences can be attributed to the aggregation strategy itself. To this end, we consider two representative CNNs: ALEX NET [19], due to its simplicity and importance in the DL community, and R ES NET 18 [20], due to its efficiency and wide adoption in computer vision. A LEX NET is trained on CINIC-10 [21], a proxy based on CIFAR-10 with ImageNet-1K images usage, while R ES NET 18 is trained on CIFAR-100 [22], a more realistic cross-silo use case. All experiments were conducted using Python v3.10, Py-Torch v2.6 and Flower 1 v1.25. To ensure reproducibility, random seeds were fixed across all relevant libraries. Hyperparameters were chosen to maximize validation ac-curacy for the baseline method and then kept fixed across all methods within each model/dataset suite. Concretely, we ran preliminary ablations over a short horizon of 5 epochs on a grid of learning rate (LR) and weight decay (WD), 

(LR , WD) ∈ { 10 −1, 10 −2, 10 −3} × { 10 −3, 10 −4}, and se-lected (LR , WD) = (10 −2, 10 −4) as it yielded the highest validation accuracy. Unless otherwise stated, all experiments use batch size 64 per client. We emphasize that such cen-tralized hyperparameter search may be impractical in fully realistic federated deployments; here it is used solely to ensure a competitive and consistent baseline for comparing aggre-gation procedures. We also studied results under both SGD and A DAM W, using the same selected (LR , WD) pair for fair comparison across aggregation schemes, finally keeping SGD due to better results on the baseline. TL schedules are selected centrally as described in Sec-tion III-B using a calibration protocol. In particular, we determine the freezing depth by starting from a conservative policy (freezing up to the penultimate block, i.e., training only the last two blocks) and progressively unfreezing earlier blocks until validation accuracy no longer improves (or starts decreas-ing), which we interpret as a signal of incipient catastrophic forgetting. Under this criterion, for A LEX NET we only train the classifier, whereas for R ES NET 18 we train both the 4th 

convolutional block and the classifier. We simulate a cross-silo federation with M = 10 clients and a single central server. We consider two client parti-tion schemes implemented in the Flower framework: (i) an 

> 1https://flower.ai/

Fig. 2: Experiments performed over different model architec-tures and datasets, showing an improvement of F ED SQ over the other approaches. Left column indicates the experiments performed over A LEX NET . Right column indicates the exper-iments performed over R ES NET 18 i.i.d. split (uniform random assignment of samples); and (ii) 

a heterogeneous Dirichlet split with concentration parame-ter α = 0.5 [23]. We use full participation ( K = M )and one local epoch per communication round ( E = 1). For A LEX NET /CINIC-10 we run T = 5 rounds since the model saturates quickly (only the classifier is trained under the selected schedule). For R ES NET 18/CIFAR-100 we run 

T = 30 rounds, using as a reference the number of epochs needed to train the model centralized. We compare server-side aggregation strategies under two client-partition regimes. Under an i.i.d. partition, we benchmark the standard F ED AVG 

procedure against the proposed F ED SQ. Under a heteroge-neous Dirichlet partition, we compare F ED AVG and F ED PROX 

(as it performs better than F ED AVG under unbalanced clients) against F ED SQ, in order to assess robustness under client drift. Table I summarizes the experimental outcomes. We consider the two client data-partition regimes, both implemented in the Flower framework. Under the i.i.d. regime, we compare the standard F ED AVG baseline against F ED SQ. Under the Dirich-let regime, we additionally include F ED PROX , as it performs better than F ED AVG under unbalanced clients. These results are reported in Table I and visually supported by the learning curves in Figure 2. For A LEX NET under i.i.d. partitioning, the gap between F ED AVG and F ED SQ is small (within fractions of a percent), suggesting that when heterogeneity is mild and only the classifier is trained, the benefit of fixed gating is limited, yet F ED SQ matches or improves upon the baselines TABLE I: Comparison of federated algorithms. Best Val-idation Accuracy (BVA) denotes the best validation score achieved during training; “Epoch” reports the communication round at which BVA is attained.                           

> Model/Dataset Part. Scheme Aggregation Round BVA
> ALEX NET /CINIC-10 i.i.d. FED AVG 568.31
> FED SQ 568.10 Dirichlet FED AVG 562.60 FED PROX 562.30 FED SQ 563.00
> RES NET 18/ CIFAR-100 i.i.d. FED AVG 21 72.44 FED SQ 18 77.40
> Dirichlet FED AVG 30 70.97 FED PROX 20 71.44 FED SQ 30 76.45

under Dirichlet partitioning, indicating increased robustness when the client distributions diverge. R ES NET 18 on CIFAR-100 exhibits a clear and systematic gain: F ED SQ reaches substantially higher best validation accuracy than F ED AVG 

under both i.i.d. and Dirichlet splits, and it does so earlier in training. Concretely, F ED SQ achieves the best validation score 3 rounds earlier under i.i.d. (18 vs. 21 rounds) and shows a markedly stronger advantage under Dirichlet heterogeneity (best validation score in the mid-to-late rounds while F ED AVG 

lags behind), as reflected by the separation of curves in Figure 2, which highlights that exploiting the piecewise-affine DualCopy view can make the federated aggregation phase not only more stable, but also more effective in extracting transferable performance under cross-silo heterogeneity. V. C ONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 

We introduced F ED SQ, a federated training procedure mo-tivated by the decoupling between SK and QK. In F ED SQ, a frozen structural component induces binary gating masks, and the federated stage focuses on aggregating only the quantita-tive copy, effectively learning within-regime affine refinements under a DualCopy piecewise-linear view. Across two CNN architectures and heterogeneous client partitions, our results show that this design can improve convergence behavior and robustness under non-i.i.d. splits, and can reach competitive (and in some cases superior) validation accuracy compared to standard baselines. Beyond the empirical gains, F ED SQ provides a practical handle to exploit gating explicitly in FL, which has re-ceived comparatively less attention than optimizer-centric or personalization-centric approaches. This opens several lines of research. First, once the structural component is fixed, the quantitative updates may admit additional compression without sacrificing performance, for instance via low-rank or sparsified updates, reducing communication costs. Sec-ond, the decoupling suggests adaptive system policies: fewer local epochs, fewer participating clients per round, or re-duced communication frequency after the structural compo-nent has stabilized, trading compute for communication in a controlled manner. Third, while this paper focuses on a transfer-initialized regime, an important next step is to study an alternative initialization pathway in Algorithm 1: learning structural knowledge from scratch via a short centralized training phase on a calibration set, freezing it once mature, and then proceeding with federated QK-only refinement. Finally, FED SQ appears naturally compatible with asynchronous or partially reliable federated settings, where clients may join intermittently, which lead to a promising line of work, where fixing the gating structure in advance can reduce instability due to drift, making late-stage aggregation easier to stabilize. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

This work was supported by the project C121/23 CIBER-CAFE funded by INCIBE, and by the projects 

PID2023-146569NB-C21 and PID2023-146569NB-C22 

supported by MICIU/AEI/10.13039/501100011033 and ERDF/UE. Alberto Fern´ andez-Hern´ andez was supported by the predoctoral grant PREP2023-001826 supported by MICIU/AEI/10.13039/501100011033 and ESF+. Jose I. Mestre was supported by the project PCI2024-161827-3 funded by MICIU/AEI/10.13039/501100011033 and 

NextGenerationEU/PRTR . Manuel F. Dolz was supported by the Plan Gen–T grant CIDEXG/2022/013 of the Generalitat Valenciana .REFERENCES [1] B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A. y. Arcas, “Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized data,” in Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics , 2017. [2] P. Kairouz and H. B. McMahan, “Advances and open problems in federated learning,” Foundations and trends in machine learning , vol. 14, no. 1-2, pp. 1–210, 2021. [3] X. Li, M. Jiang, X. Zhang, M. Kamp, and Q. Dou, “FedBN: Federated learning on non-IID features via local batch normalization,” in Interna-tional Conference on Learning Representations , 2021. [4] L. Collins, H. Hassani, A. Mokhtari, and S. Shakkottai, “Exploiting shared representations for personalized federated learning,” in Interna-tional Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , 2021. [5] M. Reisser, C. Louizos, E. Gavves, and M. Welling, “Federated mixture of experts,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.06724 , 2021. [6] J. Koneˇ cn´ y, H. B. McMahan, F. X. Yu, P. Richtarik, A. T. Suresh, and D. Bacon, “Federated learning: Strategies for improving communication efficiency,” in NIPS Workshop on Private Multi-Party Machine Learning ,2016. [7] D. Alistarh et al. , “QSGD: Communication-efficient SGD via gradient quantization and encoding,” in Advances in Neural Information Process-ing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2017. [8] Y. Lin, S. Han, H. Mao, Y. Wang, and W. J. Dally, “Deep gradient compression: Reducing the communication bandwidth for distributed training,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.01887 , 2017. [9] F. Sattler, S. Wiedemann, K.-R. M¨ uller, and W. Samek, “Robust and communication-efficient federated learning from non-iid data,” IEEE transactions on neural networks and learning systems , 2019. [10] J. Nguyen, J. Wang, K. Malik, M. Sanjabi, and M. Rabbat, “Where to begin? on the impact of pre-training and initialization in federated learning,” in Workshop on Federated Learning: Recent Advances and New Challenges (in Conjunction with NeurIPS 2022) , 2022. [11] H.-Y. Chen, C.-H. Tu, Z. Li, H. W. Shen, and W.-L. Chao, “On the importance and applicability of pre-training for federated learning,” in 

The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations ,2023. [12] Z. Zhou, G. Luo, M. Chen, Z. Weng, and Y. Zhu, “Federated learning for medical image classification: A comprehensive benchmark,” IEEE journal of biomedical and health informatics , 2025. [13] J. Yosinski, J. Clune, Y. Bengio, and H. Lipson, “How transferable are features in deep neural networks?” Advances in neural information processing systems , vol. 27, 2014. [14] C. P´ erez-Corral, A. Fern´ andez-Hern´ andez, J. I. Mestre, M. F. Dolz, J. Duato, and E. S. Quintana-Ort´ ı, “Regime change hypothesis: Foun-dations for decoupled dynamics in neural network training,” 2026. [15] J. Duato, J. I. Mestre, M. F. Dolz, E. S. Quintana-Ort´ ı, and J. Cano, “Decoupling structural and quantitative knowledge in ReLU-based deep neural networks,” in Proceedings of the 5th Workshop on Machine Learning and Systems , ser. EuroMLSys ’25, 2025. [16] T. Li, A. K. Sahu, and Z. et al., “Federated optimization in heterogeneous networks,” in Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems , 2020. [17] S. J. Reddi, Z. Charles, M. Zaheer, Z. Garrett, K. Rush, J. Koneˇ cn´ y, S. Kumar, and H. B. McMahan, “Adaptive federated optimization,” in 

International Conference on Learning Representations , 2021. [18] J. Oh, S. Kim, and S.-Y. Yun, “FedBABU: Toward enhanced representa-tion for federated image classification,” in International Conference on Learning Representations , 2022. [19] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, “Imagenet classification with deep convolutional neural networks,” in Advances in Neural Infor-mation Processing Systems . Curran Associates, Inc., 2012. [20] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for image recognition,” in 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2016. [21] L. N. Darlow, E. J. Crowley, A. Antoniou, and A. J. Storkey, “Cinic-10 is not imagenet or cifar-10,” 2018. [22] A. Krizhevsky, “Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images,” Tech. Rep., 2009. [23] M. Yurochkin, M. Agarwal, S. Ghosh, K. Greenewald, T. N. Hoang, and Y. Khazaeni, “Bayesian nonparametric federated learning of neural networks,” 2019.